༄༅།།བོད་ཀྱི་ནང་བསྟན་དཔེ་ཚོགས་ལྟེ་གནས།།
Tibetan Buddhist Resource Center
Text Scan Input Form - Title Page
Work:
ImageGroup:
11 KG6078
W1KG6061
||2002534221
LCCN:
ISBN:
1570629315
Title:
tibetan elemental divination paintings : illuminated manuscripts from the
white beryl of sangs-rgyas rgya-mtsho with the moonbeams treatise of
|lo-chen dharmasri
Author:
གྱུརྨེ་དརྗེ་
gyurme dorje
n/a
n/a;n/a
Descriptor:
Original Publication:
Place:
Publisher:
Date:
london
john eskenazi in association with sam gogg
2001
Volume:
Total Volumes:
TBRC Pages:
Introductory Pages:
Text Pages:
lllll
n/a
Scanning Information:
Scanned at Tibetan Buddhist Resource Center, 150 West 17th St, New York City, NY
10011, US. Comments: 10/2010



Published by soon Eskenazi in association with Sam Fogu
Tibetan
Elemental Divination
Paintings
Illuminated manuscripts from
The White Beryl of Sang-rgyas rGya-mtsho
with the Moonbeams treatise of Lo-chen Dharmasri
HET
Commentary and translations by Gyurme Dorje



The White Beryl



Published by John Eskenazi in association with Sam Fogg
Tibetan
Elemental Divination
Illuminated manuscripts from
The White Beryl of Sangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho
with the Moonbeams treatise of Lo-chen Dharmaśrī
Commentary and translations by Gyurme Dorje



BO



Contents
Foreword by His Holiness The Dalai Lama 8
Publisher's foreword 9
Preface 10
Introduction 14
The Plates 22
The origins and transmission of elemental divination 44
11
The hidden points of the turtle divination chart 60
III
Geomantic aspects of the years, months, days and hours 118
IV
Divinations of natal horoscope 138
V
Divinations concerning marriage 192
SK
ASUK



vi
Divinations of obstacle years 224
VII
The impact of the hour of divination 260
VIII
Divinations of ill-health 294
IX
Divinations of death 306
X
The thirty Chinese and Tibetan computational charts 358
xi
The thirteen charts of Bal-mo lding-skor 388
Conclusion 398
Notes 402
Glossary and list of abbreviations 412
Bibliography and works cited 422
Index of proper names 425
Subject index 428
Author biography 432



8
The White Beryl
Organg ngayo
Foreword
by His Holiness The Dalai Lama
Divination, using various means to decide or predict what cannot be judged by ordinary means, has long been a part of the Tibetan way of
life. With the introduction of Buddhism into Tibet in the seventh century these procedures came to be used within a Buddhist framework,
functioning in accordance with Buddhist principles such as interdependence and karma or cause and effect. However, although many ref-
erences to divination are to be found in the tantras, there is none in the collection of sutras.
In Tibet, major decisions concerning everyday life – such as marriages or business agreements – are often only
made after consulting some form of divination. For example, people want to know whether a proposed partnership will be happy, whether
a house built on a particular location will be peaceful, whether the sick will recover and what will be the most beneficial form of treatment.
They want guidance about when to begin an important undertaking. When a child is born they want to know his or her prospects, and
when a death has occurred they seek advice as to what will be, for the deceased, the most beneficial way of disposing of the corpse.
Answers to many of these questions are sought by means of elemental divination, a science that purports to reveal
ultimate truth by way of relative truth. The necessary calculations are done by people known generally as astrologers or diviners, who
work and train in conjunction with the Tibetan medical profession.
The present book presents a remarkable manuscript that illustrates the section on elemental divination in sde-srid
Sangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho's classic work, White Beryl. The manuscript itself is extremely rare and the matter it deals with is uncommon. I
am delighted to see that it not only has survived but also that, due to the efforts of Dr Gyurme Dorje, generously supported by Mr John
Eskenazi and Mr Sam Fogg, it is being made available to a wider readership, along with a summary of Sangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho's work
and a translation of Lo-chen Dharmaśrī's Moonbeams: An Esoteric Instruction on Elemental Divination. I am also gratified to know that the
author benefited greatly from his collaboration with Dr Tshul-khrims rGyal-mtshan of the Medical College (sMan-rtsis-khang) in
Lhasa, who gave him an oral explanation of the work.
I am confident that this carefully produced book will cast light on a little known but widely practised aspect of
Tibetan life, and reveal another exquisite example of the wealth of Tibetan literature.
Dharamsala, February 2001



Publisher's foreword
by John Eskenazi
When I first came across the striking illustrated manuscript that is the subject of this book, I realised straight away that I had stumbled
upon something that had a greater significance beyond its obvious aesthetic quality.
Although I consulted numerous Tibetan scholars, none was able to shed much light as to its subject and meaning.
It was at this point that I was lucky enough to be introduced to Gyurme Dorje, who, with his immense breadth of learning and his passion
for Tibet and its culture, was able to unravel the conundrum through his detailed research. It seemed that the elaborate series of charts
represented a traditional system of divination based on the five elements, and that the pictures themselves illustrated the contents of the
White Beryl, a renowned treatise on astrology and divination. Layer upon layer of painstaking discovery eventually revealed not only who
commissioned the work and when, but the subtle intricacies and methodology of the entire system. Although woodblock prints on the
subject of elemental divination are fairly commonplace, the monks – who are followers of the tradition – were aware of nothing of this
detail and complexity.
Two years later, after much intense work, Gyurme Dorje presented me with the culmination of his translation
and research, much of it done in consultation with Tibetan monks and academics. As any publisher knows, however, the project was far
from over. Mark Vernon-Jones had the very skilled job of creating a beautiful yet functional design, whilst the editorial contribution of
Christine Davis has been invaluable. A special thank-you goes to Bobby Marcuson who had the difficult task of pulling together all the
disparate parts in the production process. I was fortunate to have a truly dedicated and talented team of people working very hard on this
large and complicated volume, and I am indebted to them all for their vision, commitment and professionalism. I also want to express my
sincere thanks to Sam Fogg, the well-known specialist in rare books and manuscripts, for his enthusiasm and courage in joining me in
this ambitious venture; and to the owner of the illustrated manuscript for allowing publication of the work.
I believe that art should act as conduit to a higher spiritual level, and I am always drawn to works that possess this
quality. Thus it is with great pleasure that I am able to present this extraordinary manuscript to a wider audience via this publication.
I trust that it will stand for many years to come as testimony to the richness and depth of the Tibetan culture.
London, March 2001



Preface
39



The unique illuminated manuscript reproduced in the present volume illustrates the intricate tabular calculations of elemental divination
('byung-rtsis) that are described in the White Beryl (Vaidūrya dKar-po). During the late seventeenth century, when much of Tibet was
unified by Mongol force of arms, the regent Sangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho (1653–1705) emerged as a great potentate. Though perhaps better
known as an adept political administrator and the builder of the Red Palace of the Potala in Lhasa, the regent was, at the same time, a
remarkable polymath: his important works on Tibetan medicine, divination, religious history and a plethora of other subjects fill twenty-
six volumes. Sangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho undoubtedly utilised his powerful position as effective ruler of Tibet to convene teams of scholars
and artists, without whose assistance the vast amount of detail evident in his monumental White Beryl treatise and other works could not
have been amassed and collated. His collected works stand alongside the Potala Palace as a testament to the endeavours harnessed dur-
ing that revitalising period of Tibetan history.
In Tibetan society a clear distinction is drawn between high Buddhist culture and the so-called lesser sciences,
which include astrology and divination. Yet, despite the dominance of Buddhist thought, the Tibetan people continue to display
an almost obsessive interest in the arts of prognostication. Divinatory techniques employing the rosary, the 'ju-thig cord and the
tabular calculation of the relationships formed by the elements (wood, fire, earth, iron' and water) are frequently applied in order
to obtain sagacious pronouncements on all aspects of secular life – birth, marriage, obstacles, disease and death – as well as
spiritual progress. It is not therefore surprising that Sangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho's White Beryl treatise on astrology/divination, and the
companion Blue Beryl (Vaidūrya sNgon-po) on medicine, both reveal the author's personal preoccupation and fascination with divinatory
predictions and the magical rites of Bon and Buddhism through which negative outcomes could be averted. Here, the minor rituals of
Bon and Buddhism are emphasised not for the sake of spiritual enlightenment or emancipation from the sufferings of cyclic existence, but
to determine far more mundane matters: natal horoscope, rites of passage, marital compatibility, material success, or the ritual avoid-
ance of impending tragedies.
The Tibetan system of elemental divination has both Chinese Buddhist and Daoist antecedents, for which reason
it is often known as Chinese divination (nag-rtsis) when contrasted with the system of classical Indian astrology (dkar-rtsis). Its historical
origins are generally attributed to the legendary Emperor Fuxi, to King Wan of the Zhou dynasty and his son Duke Tan, as well as to
Confucius. The Chinese Buddhist tradition of elemental divination accepts this lineage, but attributes the original teaching to the bodhisattva
Mañjughoșa at Mount Wu Tai Shan. In Tibet, during the early and later disseminations of Buddhism – which coincide respectively with
the powerful kings of the Yarlung dynasty (7th–9th century) and the formative period of the New Translation Schools (11th–19th century) –
the great texts of elemental divination were translated from Chinese into Tibetan by masters of the Tang and Song dynasties, working in
close collaboration with their Tibetan colleagues. The system was subsequently integrated inside Tibet with those of Indian astrology
(dkar-rtsis) and Nepalese martial conquest (gYul-rgyal), and this is the transmission which eventually fell to the regent Sangs-rgyas
rGya-mtsho. Nowadays, the fully integrated techniques of astrology and divination are practised at the sMan-rtsis-khang Institutes in
Lhasa and Dharamsala, as well as in other centres where yearly almanacs are prepared for public use.
During his lifetime the regent was responsible for commissioning an important series of seventy-nine paintings
illustrating the entire system of Tibetan medicine outlined in the Blue Beryl treatise. These have been well documented (see Tibetan
Medical Paintings, Serindia, 1992). During the century that followed the regent's untimely death, his White Beryl treatise was to provide
the textual basis for a parallel set of illuminated manuscripts (dpe-ris) depicting the zodiac (go-la) of Indian astrology, the cakra diagrams
of martial conquest, and the elaborate charts (gab-tshe) of Chinese elemental divination. This remarkable manuscript, which came to light
in Tibet in the late 1980s, now lacks the zodiacal charts, and only six folios of the section on martial conquest survive. However, it does
contain the finest and most detailed extant set of illuminated manuscripts depicting the full system of elemental divination.
The manuscript's ninety-four illustrated folios (each 10.8 x 60.7 cm) are based directly on the words and content
of Sangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho's White Beryl. It in fact forms two distinct sets. The first comprises fifty-nine folios, with captions written in
dbu-can script; the second, commissioned at a later date, comprises thirty-five folios with captions written in dbu-med script. The second
set contains supplementary charts from the White Beryl that were not included in the original set.
The role of the diviner in Tibetan society continues to be prestigious. The public will make offerings to those
who have acquired a high reputation for the accuracy of their predictions, just as they would offer donations to important spiritual
teachers. Yet the highly elaborate modes of prediction described in the White Beryl treatise and in the paintings are surely indicative of a
courtly tradition, the preserve of affluent aristocrats. The general public, lacking the means to request such detailed readings, would
resort to simplified schematic charts and published almanacs or, more frequently, to the rosary, dice or "ju-thig methods.
Opposite and Above Lineage-holders of elemental divination:
Dus-rams Don-grub Kun-dga' (far left), dGe-bsnyen bSod-nams Tshe
'Dzin-pa (left) and IDum-po Don-grub dBang-rgyal (above)



12
The White Beryl
Opposite Detail of Plate 1, fig. 2
Acknowledgements
This work is the result of research which I carried out at the sMan-rtsis-khang Institute in Lhasa between 1996 and 1998. I am
indebted to Dr Tshul-khrims rGyal-mtshan of the sMan-rtsis-khang who, despite his frail health, set aside valuable time to explain
methodically the principles of elemental divination, based on the oral transmission of Lo-chen Dharmaśrī's Moonbeams commentary. The
intricate relationship between the uniquely detailed charts depicted in our manuscript and the chapters of the White Beryl treatise was
determined with his kind assistance. Tshul-khrims rGyal-mtshan is not only a lineage-holder of the Sa-skya school, responsible for the
reconstruction and revitalising of Nalanda Monastery near Lhasa, but he is also a practising physician whose diagnoses and prescrip-
tions are constantly in demand, and one of the few acknowledged living experts in the field of Tibetan astrology and elemental divina-
tion. In addition, Dr Yumpa of the sMan-rtsis-khang Institute provided model computer print-out charts as currently utilised at the
sMan-rtsis-khang, and assisted with the interpretation of obscure passages in the text and manuscript. I am also grateful to Mrs Lhadron
who facilitated my work in Lhasa.
The publication of the present volume owes everything to the vision and patronage of John Eskenazi, who
brought the manuscript to the attention of Tibetologists and generously funded my research in Tibet, and his colleague Sam Fogg.
Throughout the project, Mr Eskenazi has taken an active interest in the development of the text and has made important suggestions
with regard to its content, design and production. Above all, he has provided the scholars of the sMan-rtsis-khang Institute in Lhasa
with a unique resource, for previously it was feared that this most detailed of divination manuscripts had been irretrievably lost during
the Cultural Revolution.
I would also like to express my heartfelt thanks to the highly professional team with whom I have had the good
fortune to work on this project. Mark Vernon-Jones painstakingly transformed the intricate complexity of the text, juxtaposed with
colour plates, tables and charts, into a work of minimalist simplicity and grace. Christine Davis carefully edited the text with great atten-
tion to detail, while Robert Marcuson oversaw all aspects of the production and assumed direct responsibility for the colour reproduc-
tion. I would also like to thank to Ken Wilson for his work on the diacritical fonts, Liz Spicer for correcting the typescript, and Mike
Gilmore for reading the text prior to publication.
note
1 Although the Tibetan lcags generically corresponds
to‘metal (Ch. tie), I have followed the convention
of translating this term as ‘iron', which is also one
of its meanings.
Technical note
The book is divided into eleven parts, corresponding to specific chapters of the White Beryl treatise. These respectively concern: the leg-
endary origin and historical transmission of elemental divination in ancient China and Tibet; the basic concepts of this system symbol-
ised by the turtle divination chart; geomantic observations; natal horoscope; marital compatibility; obstacle years; the impact of the hour
of divination; ill-health; and death; along with a number of concluding computational charts. The chapter and folio numbers of the Lhasa
edition of the original Tibetan text are inserted in parentheses as necessary. The versified text of Lo-chen Dharmaśrī's Moonbeams com-
mentary ('Byung-rtsis man-ngag zla-ba'i 'od-zer) has also been inserted in the appropriate contexts. These two treatises (White Beryl and
Moonbeams) were composed between 1683 and 1685 to commemorate the beginning of a new sexagenary year cycle, which according to
the system of elemental divination falls on the wood mouse year (in this case 1684).
The colour manuscripts, which have been reproduced alongside the text, altogether comprise ninety-four folios,
of which the original series (Ms 1) is numbered ff. 1–59 and the supplementary series (Ms 11) is numbered ff. 1–35. These folios have been
subdivided for the sake of this publication into twenty-two plates, of which Plates 1-15 correspond to the original manuscript, and Plates
16–22 to the supplementary manuscript. One plate may comprise anything from one to seven folios. Each plate has been subdivided for
the purposes of this publication into a series of ‘figures', each of them dealing with a different aspect of elemental divination. (The position
of each figure within a given plate is shown in the Plates section, pp. 22–43.) These figures frequently dovetail across different folios. The
content of each figure is explained within the text, and reflected in the accompanying table. In some cases the tables contain translations
of text appearing on the illuminated manuscript, which is itself derived verbatim from the White Beryl, and in other cases they interpret
visual images which themselves depict textual descriptions contained in passages of the White Beryl.
In addition, the text contains a number of schematic and exemplary charts which demonstrate how the system of
elemental divination is practically applied at the sMan-rtsis-khang Institute in Lhasa; these largely correspond to the methodology of
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī as presented in the Moonbeams commentary. Traditionally, white, black or mottled pebbles (rdel/ rde'u) were
deployed to indicate the various types of relationship formed between the five elements (wood, fire, earth, iron and water). These ele-
ments are sometimes depicted in their primary elemental forms, but also frequently as trigrams, numeric squares, or animal signs. In the
schematic charts that are utilised nowadays, the pebbles are represented by inscribed noughts and crosses. The model schematic charts
reproduced in this book illustrate how these calculations are practically applied in the context of natal horoscope and divinations con-
cerning marital compatibility, obstacle years, ill-health, death, and the so-called computational charts'.
The endnotes are followed by a glossary of technical terms, and a bibliography including both Tibetan works
cited in the text and secondary language sources. The reader should note that original Tibetan, Sanskrit and Chinese technical terms are
italicised in the body of the text, while proper names have been formally transcribed, including the appropriate diacritical marks and
unpronounced prefixes or suffixes. Those unfamiliar with the pronunciation of Tibetan proper names should consult the index, where a
phonetic equivalent is given alongside the formal transcription.



200
C)



Introduction



1.5
The classical sciences (Tib. rig-gnas, Skt. vidyā) that were introduced into Tibet from Buddhist India and China from the seventh century
onwards are traditionally categorised in terms of the five major sciences (Sanskrit grammar, medicine, logic, art and Buddhism) and the
five minor sciences (astrology-cum-divination, poetics, prosody, synonymics and drama). Many of the treatises of the nine sciences
peripheral to Buddhism have been gathered together in the Tibetan Canon of Translated Treatises (bsTan-'gyur), and there are a large num-
ber of indigenous Tibetan compositions on all these subjects.
The classical science of astrology-cum-divination (Tib. rtsis-kyi rig-gnas, Skt. jyotirvidyā) is considered in Tibet to
have three distinct branches: astrology (skar-rtsis), martial conquest (gYul-rgyal) and elemental divination ('byung-rtsis). From the
Tibetan point of view, these are respectively of Indian Buddhist, Nepalese Saivite and Chinese Buddhist origin. The following summaries
of the textual background to these three systems is derived from 'Jam-mgon Kong-sprul's nineteenth-century compilation entitled The
Storehouse Embracing All Knowledge (Shes-bya kun-khyab, Vol. 1, pp. 596–599).
Astrology (skar-rtsis)
Although there were many modes of astrology devised by the hermit sages of ancient India, the method that first systematised time
according to the motion of planets and constellations and made predictions concerning positive and negative consequences was attrib-
uted to the legendary hermit sages Karabha and Garga, whose Brāhmaṇical transmission comprised many treatises. However, during
the reign of Samudravijaya, the ninth Kulika King of Sambhala, which coincided with the Islamic military incursions into the Indian sub-
continent (seventh to tenth centuries), the texts of this systematic astrology (grub-rtsis) were proscribed by Muslim zealots. Only a
simplistic form of practical astrology (byed-rtsis) was permitted, thereby introducing confusion as to the impact of the planets and constel-
lations. Subsequently, the Kulika Durjaya is said to have elucidated the Abridged Tantra of the Wheel of Time (Laghukālacakra Tantra),
implementing it as a system of practical astrology, and in this way he established the basis of classical Buddhist astrology.? When the
Tantra of the Wheel of Time later became renowned throughout Buddhist India and Tibet in the fire hare year (1027), both the systematic
and the practical Brāhmaṇical astrologies went into decline, as had been prophesied. Consequently, the new ‘accurate system' (rnam-par
dag-pa'i rtsis) of calendrical astrology was formally introduced. According to the new calendar, the period of 403 years calculated from the
inception of Islamic militarism in 624 (wood monkey year)* through to 1027 is called the 'period of fire, sky and ocean’ (me-mkha' rgya-
mtsho), and the aforementioned fire hare year (1027) marks the inauguration of the series of Tibetan sexagenary year-cycles (rab-byung).
Now, the sūtras taught by the Buddha refer to logarithms of the number ten (grangs-gnas) and arithmetical com-
putations, exemplified by the enumeration of the cosmological atomic particles (Skt. paramāņu) found in the Sūtra of the Great
Bounteousness of the Buddhas (Avatamsaka Sūtra) and the Buddha's training in arithmetic which is presented in the Sūtra of Extensive Play
(Lalitavistara Sūtra). The tantras also contain general teachings on this topic, headed by the Kingly Tantra of the Ocean of Dākas
(Dākārņavatantrarāja) and particularly the clear presentation given in the chapter of the Tantra of the Wheel of Time concerning the cos-
mology of the world-systems. On the basis of such texts, scholars well-versed in astrology formulated their diverse calculations concern-
ing the exact planetary positions (gza'-dag), the calendar dates (tshes-grangs), lunar constellations (zla-skar), the conjunctions of the lunar
constellations with the exact solar position (sbyor-ba), and the sequential functionary positions (snga-phyi byed-pa), which together form
the five topics of Indian astrology
In Tibet it was Bu-ston Rin-chen-grub of Zhva-lu (1290–1364) and Dol-po-pa Shes-rab rgyal-mtshan of Jo-nang
(1292–1361) who both extensively elucidated the modes of astrology found in the so-called 'outer, inner and extraneous Wheels of Time’
(Phyi-nang gzhan-gsum-gyi dus-kyi 'khor-lo). Bu-ston composed the astrological treatise entitled Scholars' Delight (mKhas-pa dga'-byed)
and its appendices, while Dol-po-pa composed the Practical Implementation of the Five Combined Calculations: Mother and Son (INga-bsdus-
kyi lag-len ma-bu). Furthermore, Karma-pa Rang-byung rDo-rje (1284-1339) composed his Summation of All Astrological Systems (rTsis-
kun bsdus-pa) which, in seven-syllable verses that are easy to understand, elucidates the meaning of the verses of the chapter on the world-
systems from the Abridged Tantra of the Wheel of Time and also reveals some other useful astrological divinations which were not derived
from that tantra. These, then, are the original Tibetan treatises on the subject of astrology.?
In 1447 mKhas-dbang Nor-bzang rGya-mtsho and Phug-pa Lhun-grub rGya-mtsho composed the Oral
Transmissions of the White Lotus: Mother and Sons (Pad-dkar zhal-lung ma-bu), and this text was propagated by bSam-rgyal-ba and oth-
ers, their transmission later becoming known as the Phug-pa school.% Subsequently, in the seventeenth century, the divinatory system
of the Phug-pa school was more lucidly presented when Sangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho (1653–1705), the regent of Tibet, authored
his influential White Beryl treatise (Vaidūrya dKar-po) – covering both astrology and divination – and Lo-chen Dharmaśrī of sMin-grol-
gling (1654–1717) composed his Illuminating Sun (Nyin-byed snang-ba).
Opposite Line drawings depicting Sang-rgyas rGya-mtsho (far left)
and Lo-chen Dharmaśrī, the authors of our primary sources on the
subject of elemental divination



16
The White Beryl
Elsewhere, at mTshur-phu, 'Jam-dbyangs Chen-po Don-grub 'Od-zer (fl. 1447), who followed in the lineage of Karma-pa Rang-byung
rDo-rje, composed his Great Textual Tradition of Astrology (rTsis-kyi gzhung-lugs chen-mo), while Phrin-las-pa Phyogs-las rNam-rgyal
and dPa'-bo gTsug-lag 'Phreng-ba (1504–1568) composed a great commentary on Rang-byung rDo-rje's Summation of All Astrological
Systems (rTsis-kun bsdus-pa) entitled Store of Precious Treasure (rTsis-'grel rin-chen gter-mdzod).10
Subsequently, Karma Nges-legs bsTan-'dzin (fl. early eighteenth century) wrote his Nyer-mkho Bum-bzang and
other works representing this tradition of mTshur-phu." Other distinctive transmissions have also been maintained. For example, the
system of Dol-po-pa has been preserved within the Jonangpa school, while Byang-pa rNam-rgyal Grags-bzang (1395–1475) independ-
ently elucidated the tradition of the Wheel of Time in accordance with his own intellectual analysis.
Martial conquest (gYul-rgyal)
The primary source for the divinatory system of martial conquest is the Svarodaya Tantra (Yuddhajaya-nāma-tantrarāja-svarodaya),
which is said to have been taught in antiquity at the request of Devendra during the wars between the gods (deva) and the antigods
(asura). 12 Subsequently it was delivered in the form of a dialogue between the Hindu deity Mahādeva (Śiva) and his consort Umādevī; and
in the human world it was first propagated by Karmasiddhi Utpala. The lineage of its transmission in the god realms, and in ancient India
and Nepal, is indicated in the colophon to its Tibetan translation, as follows: Jaya Mahāmuni, Maheśvara, Hayagrīva, Brahmā,
Candrānandana, Karmasiddhi Utpala, Guhyacihnita, Mantrapatra, Abhinavagupta, Śankarabhadra, Sampattidharabhadra, Simhavar-
man, Mañjuśrīnandana, Prabhankara and Jayānanda. The last of these was a scholar of Jumla in Western Nepal, who translated the text
into Tibetan with the assistance of Glo-bo Lo-tsā-ba Shes-Rab rin-chen (Al. 1267). The first indigenous Tibetan commentary on the
Svarodaya Tantra is the Supreme Delight (mChog-dga), composed by Phug-pa Lhun-grub rGya-mtsho in the mid-fifteenth century.18 The
lineage derived from the latter's nephew (dbon-brgyud), mTshungs-med Sangs-rgyas Blo-gros, includes dPal-mgon Phrin-las-pa, whose
actual student Dus-rams-pa 'Chi-med bDe-ba authored another essential commentary: the Practical Implementation entitled Garland of
Gems (Lag-len nor-bu phreng-ba) also known as the Hundred Rays of Light ('Od-zer brgya-pa). 14 Other Tibetan commentaries on the
Svarodaya Tantra were independently composed, including Pad-dkar Yid-bzhin dBang-po's Wondrous Fire Ornament (Ngo-mtshar rgyan-
me) and Bo-dong-pa Yon-tan Blo-gros’s Essential Summation: Root and Commentary (s Nying-po bsdus-pa rtsa-'grel).
In addition to the Svarodaya Tantra, the Tibetan Canon of Translated Treatises (bsTan-'gyur) contains other
works of Indic origin on this divinatory tradition, notably the Synopsis of the Svarodaya (dByangs-'char-ba'i don bsdus-pa) and the Practical
Consequences of Zodiacal Conjunctions According to the Svarodaya Tantra (dByangs-'char-ba'i dus-sbyor-gyi 'bras-bu nye-bar mkho-ba).
Indigenous Tibetan works on martial conquest, which do not directly refer to the Svarodaya Tantra, also include the Clarification of the
Concealed Instructions (Man-ngag sbas-pa gsal-byed) and the Ocean of Gemstones (Rin-chen rgya-mtsho). Interest in the martial calculations of
the Svarodaya Tantra appears to have reached its height during the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries when military strategy
assumed a particular importance for Dalai Lama v and his third regent, Sangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho, during the Tibetan civil war. The for-
mer is known to have obtained instruction in this system from IDum-po-pa, Zur Chos-dbyings Rang-grol and sMon-'gro Pandita, and
the latter summarises the system in his celebrated treatise, White Beryl(Vaidūrya dKarpo), where illustrations of selected Svarodaya charts
are reproduced in Chapters Twelve and Thirty-four. As the regent himself states, these are derived from the aforementioned commen-
taries of Phug-pa lhun-grub rgya-mtsho and Dus-rams-pa 'chi-med bde-ba.
Owing to the secrecy of the Svarodaya system, which is repeatedly mentioned in its canonical treatises, it appears
to have been rarely applied in Tibet in the manner of the Indian astrological tradition, or indeed that of Chinese elemental divination,
both of which have a popular resonance. Sangs-rgyas rgya-mtsho in White Beryl even recounts how Glo-bo Lo-tsā-ba reputedly burned
some of the charts associated with the more bloodthirsty rites of warfare (gYul-rgyal skor-sogs dmar-nag-gi 'khor-lo), and concealed others
from the public domain. Writing in the nineteenth century, 'Jam-mgon Kong-sprul observed that the practical techniques of Svarodaya
were still more prevalent in India and Nepal than in Tibet. Since the essential points of its instructions were largely concealed, nowadays
in Tibet these techniques have generally survived in name alone, as part of an artistic heritage.
One notable exception should be mentioned. In 1860 Mi-pham rNam-rgyal of 'Ju (1846–1912) mastered the
ancient texts of this system at the tender age of fifteen after praying to Mañjughoșa, and three years later, at the age of eighteen, while
returning on pilgrimage from Lho-brag to Lhasa, he received instructions in a pure vision. These were subsequently redacted under the
title Crystal Mirror of the Great All-Seeing Svarodaya (Kun-gzigs dbyangs-'char chen-mo shel-gyi me-long), a treatise which is included among
his collected works. 15 An extant fifteenth-century scroll from gTsang or La-stod in westernTibet, measuring almost four metres in
length and containing 178 Svarodaya charts, has recently been documented in English.16
Elemental divination ('byung-rtsis)
Elemental divination is considered to have originated in China. According to legend, the mythical emperor Fuxi (Tib. sPa-hu hshi-dhi),
whose dates are traditionally given as 2853–2738 BC, saw a golden coloured turtle (rus-sbal) which was offered to him by a subject from
the coastal region, and upon inspecting it the patterns of the eight trigrams (Tib. spar-kha brgyad, Ch. ba gua) first arose in his mind.
Consequently the divination systems based on the elemental relationships formed by the eight trigrams, the nine numeric squares (Tib.
sme-ba dgu, Ch. jiu gong) and the twelve-year cycle (Tib. lo-skor bcu-gnyis, Ch. shi-er shu xiang) were devised, and treatises were gradually
composed by kings, ministers and learned scholars who had mastered these techniques."? In particular, an emanation of Mañjughoșa
known as Confucius (Tib. Khong-spu-rtsi, Ch. Kong fu zi), who is also known in Tibetan under the name Kong-tse 'phrul-rgyal, intro-
duced copious texts on divination, as well as rituals to promote good auspices, the ethical rectification of society, and so forth. Later still,
a very large number of texts were composed within China on these subjects. 18
It is said that the texts of elemental divination were first introduced into Tibet during the reigns of gNam-ri
Srong-btsan and Srong-btsan sGam-po, and particularly by the two Chinese princesses Wencheng and Jincheng during the seventh and
eighth centuries. Then, during the later dissemination of Buddhism (phyi-dar) in the tenth and eleventh centuries, many texts,
exemplified by the Clarifying Lamp (gSal-sgron) were translated and expounded by translators such as Khams-pa Khra-bo, Zla-ba Nag-po
and Khyung-nag Śāk-dar, who also extracted numerous divination treatises in the form of treasures (gter-ma), and thus introduced the
tradition that is now widespread. An important distinction is made in Tibet between this traditional elemental divination (rgya-rtsis



17.
Introduction
rnying-ma) and the later aspects of Chinese divination and astrology (rgya-rtsis gsar-ma) that were gradually introduced from the mid-
seventeenth century."' 'Jam-mgon Kong-sprul also recounts that some spiteful Chinese and some Tibetans of feeble merit had concealed
the earliest translations of the traditional system, including the computational charts (bskor-mgo) translated by Princess Jincheng, along
with the essentially secret computational charts, and then deliberately misrepresented their own fabricated works as originals. Such
counterfeit treatises were deemed to be incompatible with the original Chinese sources, for which reason the savant Si-tu Chos-kyi
'Byung-gnas (1770–1774) subsequently prepared new translations of the reliable and authentic texts of Chinese divination. These were
based principally on his recollections of the ancient science and secondly on the texts he found in the religious tradition of the Naxi
scholar Yang Wang Ling, among others. Many charts pertaining to the basic themes of elemental divination, including natal horoscope
(tshe-rabs las-rtsis), death (gshin-rtsis), marriage (bag-rtsis), obstacle years (keg-rtsis) and other useful predictive divinations (nyer-mkho'i
'bras-rtsis), are contained in his new translations. 20
Bon divination
Distinct from the three systems described by 'Jam-mgon Kong-sprul, which have been transmitted through Buddhist lineages, there is
also a Bon tradition of divination. This appears to be a synthesis, integrating the Zoroastrian dualism of light and darkness with Chinese
techniques and indigenous rituals. Around 200 BC a technique known as rgyan-po'i ngag-rtsis was reportedly prevalent in the kingdom of
Zhang-zhung (modern Gu-ge) and a parallel technique known as rgyan-mo bal-ma'i zla-rtsis was developed in central Tibet during the
reign of Pu-de gong-rgyal. These appear to have been modes of divination based on empirical observation (myong-rtsis) of the weather
patterns, utilising the motion of the sun, moon, planets, constellations and seasons of the year to predict the state of the harvest and its
susceptibility to hoar-frost, heavy snowfall, pestilences, drought, famine or earthquakes. Modern Tibetan calendars still include a num-
ber of observations which probably derive from that early period, such as the days of the winter gales' (dgun-rlung zhag-rtsis), the ‘forty
days following the winter solstice during which the lammergeier incubates its eggs' (bya-zhag brtag-pa), the subsequent ‘twelve days of
the constellation Bhadrapada' (khrums-zhag brtag-pa), and the period around the 25th of March during which summer droughts can be
predicted' (skyung-zhag rtag-pa).
More systematically, the first of the so-called nine ways of Bon, which are outlined in the gZid-brjid commentary,
is known as the way of the gshen of prediction (phyva-gshen-gyi theg-pa). 21 The gshen are a class of Bon priests, and this particular method
utilises the eight trigrams, the nine numeric squares, the cycle of the elements, and 'ju-thig cord divinations.22 Although there are widely
disparate views as to the antiquity of Bon divination texts, it is interesting to observe that Sangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho's White Beryl com-
mentary frequently exhorts the subject of a specific divination to apply the ritual remedies recommended by either Buddhists or Bon-pos
(ban-bon-gyi cho-ga). 23
The term gtsug-lag
The corpus of literature associated with the above sciences is also sometimes designated by the term gtsug-lag. As far as the science of
astrological divination is concerned, gtsug is hermeneutically defined as the 'unchanging five elements' (mi-'gyur 'byung-ba lnga); and lag
as the years and months which bring about divinatory understanding' (rtogs-byed lo-zla), or as “analysis by means of symbols' (gYab-mos
btang-gcod). Alternatively, gtsug refers to ‘the crown of the sublime ones from which this science emerges', and lag to ‘the hands of the
recipients to whom it is entrusted' ('phags-pa'i gtsug-nas bton | zhu-byed lag-tu bzhag). 24 In the context of the Phug-pa school, to which our
present manuscript belongs, the tradition of astrology and divination was fully integrated in the works of the recipients sde-srid Sangs-
rgyas rGya-mtsho and Lo-chen Dharmaśrī.
sDe-srid Sangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho (1653–1705)
Sangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho was born in Nyang-bran, a northern suburb of Lhasa, in 1653. From the age of eight he began to master
Buddhist literature under the tutelage of his spiritual mentor, Dalai Lama v (1617–1682), but he also studied the peripheral classical sci-
ences in great depth: Indian astrology and Sanskrit grammar under 'Dar-pa Lo-tsā-ba, Svarodaya or martial conquest under Lu-'go Bla-
mkhyen Ngag-gi dbang-po25 and the diverse medical traditions under Byang-pa Lhun-ldings-pa rNam-rgyal. In 1679 he was appointed
as the fourth regent (sde-srid) of the Tibetan government established by the Dalai Lama in Lhasa, and he maintained that position until
his untimely death at the hands of Lha-bzang Qan in 1705. During this time he completed the construction of the Red Palace of the Potala
and the 14-metre golden reliquary of the Great Fifth Dalai Lama contained within it. With the assistance of sNying-stod Yon-tan
mGonpo, in 1695 he also founded the Lhasa Medical College (sMan-rtsis-khang), emphasising the integrated study and practice of
Tibetan medicine, astrology and divination. His collected works, which fill some twenty-six volumes, include his widely acclaimed Blue
Beryl treatise (Vaidūrya sngon-po) on the Four Tantras (rGyud-bzhi) of Tibetan medicine (circa 1688), the White Beryl treatise (Vaidūrya
dKar-po) on astrology and divination (1683–85), and the Yellow Beryl History (Vaidūrya gser-po) of the dGe-lugs-pa school (1698). 26
While the great artistic endeavours inspired by the regent's rule were principally focused on the construction of
the Potala Palace, they were also to extend into the pedagogic depiction of his important treatises on Tibetan medicine, astrology and
divination. An important series of seventy-nine paintings illustrating the entire system of Tibetan medicine outlined in the Blue Beryl
treatise was directly commissioned by him, and these have subsequently been reproduced several times, most recently with English
translation and commentary in Tibetan Medical Paintings (Serindia, 1992).
At the same time, his White Beryl treatise, which integrates the various systems of astrology and divination from
the standpoint of the Phug-pa school and is renowned for ‘pointing out the ultimate truth by way of the relative', provided the textual basis
for a parallel set of illuminated manuscripts (dpe-ris). These depict the zodiac (go-la) of Indian astrology, the charts concerning martial
conquest (gYul-rgyal) which are found in the Svarodaya Tantra, and the elaborate hidden points (gab-tshe) of Chinese elemental divination.
Among these, the depictions of the zodiac are most frequently seen, reflecting the widespread attention that
Indian astrology based on the Tantra of the Wheel of Time has continued to receive in Tibet. Small metal mirrors or plaques depicting a
symbolic diagram of elemental divination known as the srid-pa-ho are popularly carried as a talisman throughout Tibet.27 However, elab-
orate depictions of the charts of elemental divination and martial conquest are rare. In the aftermath of the Cultural Revolution the schol-
ars of the sMan-rtsis-khang in Lhasa have been obliged to utilise a much abbreviated series of paintings for the teaching and practical
application of elemental divination, and there are even fewer extant colour exemplars for martial conquest.28
23 1922
Above Title pages from the Lhasa woodblock edition of the
White Beryl, 1909



18
The White Beryl
Lo-chen Dharmasri (1654–1717)
Below Title pages from the sMan-rtsis-khang woodblock edition
of Moonbeams, 1981
ཤཙོ་སྤྱརསྨིནཱམདབསག ཎི ཏོཡདེཤརིཧརཏིསྨn
ཤ འབྱུང་རྩིས་མན་ངག་ཟླ་བའི་འོད་ཕྲེརཞེས་བྱ་བ་བཞུགས་སོ།།
As the son of gSang-bdag Phrin-las Lhun-grub and younger brother of gTer-bdag gLing-pa, the founder of sMin-grol-gling Monastery
in the Grva-phyi valley of southern Tibet, Dharmaśrī was born into the heart of the rNying-ma-pa tradition. His teachers, in addition to
the aforementioned, included Dalai Lama v from whom he received monastic ordinations, and IDum-po Don-grub dBang-rgyal under
whom he studied Indian astrology, Chinese divination and Svarodaya. Renowned for his strict adherence to the monastic, bodhisattva
and mantra vows, Lo-chen is known to have given the vows of complete monastic ordination to 447 monks, and those of the noviciate to
1,290, while he delighted in expounding the Ascertainment of the Three Vows (sDom-gsum rnam-nges) alongside his teachings on
Madhyamaka and tantric empowerments. His students included masters of all schools of Tibetan Buddhism, such as Ngag-dbang Kun-
dga' bKra-shis, the hierarch of Sa-skya.
His collected works comprise eighteen volumes on diverse subjects including the celebrated commentaries on the
Guhyagarbha Tantra, entitled Ornament of the Intention of the Lord of Secrets (gSang-bdag dgongs-rgyan), and the Oral Transmission of the
Lord of Secrets (gSang-bdag zhal-lung); as well as treatises on the Sūtra Which Gathers All Intentions (mDo dgongs-pa 'dus-pa), and the con-
ventional sciences, including astrology and divination. Among these the eloquent verse treatise entitled Moonbeams: An Esoteric
Instruction on Elemental Divination ('Byung-rtsis man-ngag zla-ba'i 'od-zer), which was composed in 1684, is important for the contempo-
rary transmission of the Phug-pa school since the more extensive White Beryl treatise of Sangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho now has an inter-
rupted transmission.29 Lo-chen’s enlightened activity cruelly ended when sMin-grol-gling was sacked and he was slain along with other
family members by the zealous Dzungar armies in 1717.
CS
༄༅། །འབྱུང་ སམན་དག་ཟླ་བའི་འོད་ཟེར་ཞེས་བྱ་བ། བླམ་དང་རྗེབཙུན་
པའི་དབྱངས་ལ་ཕྱག་འཚོལ་ལོ།ཇི་ཞིགནས་ལུགས་མངོན་གཟིགསིམས། ཐོབཟུབས་
རྗེའི་གཞན་དབང་གིས། །འགྲོལ་བན་བདེའི་ཕྲིན་ལས་ཅན། གཏེར་ཆེནgམ་ལཕུག་འཆེག་
མཁྱེན་བརྩེ་འིཆུམྱེས་ཀེ་ས་རར། །རབ་སྙན་ལེགས་བཤད་བུང་བའི་དབྱངས། །བསྒྱུརམ་
The Manuscript of Elemental Divination
The discovery in the late 1980s of an elaborate set of illuminated manuscripts in Tibet has provided scholars and practitioners work-
ing in this field with a unique resource. The manuscript contains ninety-four illustrated folios (each 10.8 x 60.7 cm) depicting the system
of elemental divination, which are based directly on the words and content of Sangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho's White Beryl treatise. Although a
considerable number of charts representative of this compilation, reproduced as xylographs, metal plaques and painted scrolls, are found
in museum and private collections throughout the world, this is clearly the most elaborate and finest extant example. The volume
is enclosed within a pair of red and gold lacquered wooden book covers, decorated with dragon and flower patterns in gold against a dark
vermilion background. The design of the top cover has a large floral motif in the middle, while its inner surface is plain red. The lower
cover has a light wash of apple green.
The manuscript, which has been executed on a cotton background, utilising a technique that is well known for
painted scrolls, comprises two distinct sets. The first, comprising fifty-nine folios, with captions written in dbu-can script, was evidently
commissioned at Sa-skya some sixty years after the death of Sangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho during the period of the Sa-skya hierarchs Ngag-
dbang kun-dga' blo-gros (1717–1783), dBang-sdud sNying-po (1763–1806) and the monk E-vam bzang-po, also known as Kun-dga'
phan-bde rgya-mtsho (1766–1788). The final lineage master is the venerable monk named Kun-dga', a councillor (mdun-na 'don-pa) of
the Sa-skya hierarchs, who appears to have directly commissioned the manuscript. The master artist is identified as the venerable monk
bSod-nams dPal-'byor of rTse-gdong, who is mentioned in the invocatory verses of Plate 1.
Right The Manuscript of Elemental Divination and its
lacquered wooden cover



19
Introduction
1 SAR
S
རྡོ ཛ ཛཱས། མྱ ལ རྒྱུ གད༔ ༈ དོ མཱུ ལ པྲ ཚེ སུ བྱ པྲ ཏེ ་
ugaritionis fiuen ala WIZ came to gril a argarlou CANLI
मरातभरामावतागवाधिोधनाशामात मग्राम
ནྟི སུ༑ ཚཐཱ ཨཱི ང བ ༡ ཚབླགྱུར༔ ? ་ རྟའུ ཁྱི ག ང
gའི་མེརངཤུར་མ་དྲས་མཚོ་ཆེན་པ; ༽ གཅེས་པས ་འ༠ ཚེ ནི སྐོར་འག་རེའུལ།།
घाट मशानशातगाया जातानाबाना माशाला
1:| པ ཊ ཋཱ༔ ལྟར ཏ ཡིགྷདྲིཔ ཨཱ ཏེ་ སྦོར ཀུ ཤུཀློ ཕ
3nZནtཉེ་འབྲ༦༦3སྐྱེ་གདྨའི་ཏུན། གད་སདཆན(བཞི (བའི་གནས་ ༥༠་སའ11 དཔར་
b
23 asawa
མ་ཞིས ལཱ པྲ་ཀུཀྐ རྒྱུ ད སྨྱོ༴ ནཱ ཀེ ཡ། ཧ ཁཱ། ལ ་་།
43
anni. 41 uglavnoga connue
घायामाहादावितकात मातमोरयतामापानमायनदयानमा
1| པྲསཱུ བྱ – ལཏ། བྷཱུ ཏ ནམཱུ ཏུ ལ ཙྩོ ༧ པེ ཏ ཀ ཤི་ཀ - བྱཱ པྲམདསུ བྷ མ
2ོར ཁོརེ༦ལེ ་ས དམ; 1:|:༥༥ན་ཡིད་༨ ༨༠༦༡༨༦༩ ་ཤི མཛེས 5༔ ཀའི ཉི ཏེ། ནts
– ཆ དེའི ༧ ཀྵ ཁ ་ པ ར ཀླུ ཀཱ དི ༧ ལས༔ སུ ཉི དྷ པོ གྲྭ་
ཇི ས ་ཙ9 ་ཀྱང་༥༨་༦སྒྱུ ( ༠༠༤ པའི ་ ་ བློ ༌ ་) ( 43.31 3 ་ ༥་པ (1ི་ངོ ༨
བོ
་
dows
Plate 1, fig. 1 (Ms I: ff. 3–5): Invocatory verses of the manuscript
snang-srid zil-gnon padmākara'i lung|
The perfect gems of divination and computational charts,
tshad-mas rab-bsngags mu-ni'i rnam-rol mchog
Were essentialised from the Anavatapta Lake of Buddha's eloquence -
buddha'i legs gsung ma-dros mtsho chen-las/
gces-btus gab-rtse bskor-'go rin-chen phull
gru-'dzin gnyis-'thung zhal-skyes gangā'i rgyunl
gdengs-can blti-ba'i gnas-mchog dpal sa-skyar/
That supreme emanation of the Sage (Sangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho),
Extolled by the authentic prophesies of Padmākara,
Manifesting in the form known as sNang-srid Zil-gnon.
The Ganges stream arising from the elephant's mouth
"phos-ba'i ngo-mtshar-gyi phyugs gdan-sa-bal
kun-blo'i dad-'dun klu-dbang rtsed-'jo'i gzhil
sku drin 'khor-med gyar-gsung blo-ldan chel
[Glang-chen kha-bab) of Potālaka,
Flowed to Sa-skya, the glorious power place of the hooded nāgas,
And so became an object of amusement for the king of nāgas',
rab-dkar ka-shi mdzes-dga'i nor-'dzin marl
Revered by all as the incumbent of that astonishingly wealthy residence."
Through his uninterrupted
kindness and most intelligent speech (gyar-gsung),
gzugs-ris chu-klung sor-mo sgyur mkhas-pa'il
byed-po rtse-gdong bsod-nams dpal-'byor-roll
The artist bSod-nams dPal-'byor of rTse-gdong,
Skilled in the proportionate drawing of rivers,
Executed these (paintings] on a most exquisite base (nor-'dzin-ma) of whitest Benares cotton.
Unfortunately, the manuscript appears to have no extant title page. 32 In calligraphic line and palette these paintings are stylistically
close to those of Tibetan Medical Paintings, even in their representation of human figures, their dress and coiffure.
The second set, comprising thirty-five folios with captions written in dbu-med script, was commissioned subse-
quently to supplement the first. It contains supplementary divination charts for which no space was available in the original set, drawn
from various chapters of the White Beryl and covering all the distinct themes of elemental divination. With a few notable exceptions, it is
manifestly the work of a less refined artist than bSod-nams dPal-'byor and his apprentices.
Although these charts once functioned as table-top grids upon which the black, white or neutral divinatory peb-
bles would be directly placed, they have more generally been utilised as model wall-charts, while a schematic grid is actually utilised for
specific divinations, the white pebbles being indicated by noughts and the black pebbles by crosses. The elements on which the divinatory
relationships are based are depicted symbolically in accordance with the ancient sPor-thang scrolls.3s Wood is green and depicted as a
tree or bush, fire is red and depicted as a triangular flame, earth is yellow and depicted as an oblong rectangle, iron is white and depicted
as sharp-pointed metal shreds or blades, while water is blue and depicted as waves.
Correspondence between the chapters of White Beryl and the manuscript
The White Beryl treatise altogether contains thirty-five chapters (633 folios) in its Lhasa and sDe-dge editions.34 These concern all
aspects of astrology and divination, as presented by the Phug-pa school, and among them Chapters 20–32 are specifically on the subject
of elemental divination. The correspondence between these chapters and the illuminated manuscript folios is as follows:
Ch. 20 The Inner Content of Elemental Divination ('byung-rtsis khog-'bug, ff. 129–154): Plate 1 (Ms 1: ff. 3–5), concerning the legendary
origins of elemental divination at Mount Wu Tai Shan; and Plates 2–13 (Ms 1: ff. 6–58, uppermost cartouches), concerning the transmis-
sion of elemental divination through Chinese and Tibetan lineage-holders down to the eighteenth century.
Ch. 21 Preliminaries of Elemental Divination (nag-rtsis sngon-'gro; ff. 154–159): Plates 1–2 (Ms 1: ff. 3–12), concerning the elaborate turtle
divination chart. This includes all the nine basic techniques of elemental divination: the five constitutional types (rus-khams-lnga); the
sexagenary year cycle (lo drug-bcu; see also Plates 3–8); the nine numeric squares (sme-ba dgu); the eight trigrams (spar-kha brgyad); the
twelve months (zla-ba bcu-gnyis); the thirty days of the month (zhag sum-bcu); the twelve two-hour periods of the day (dus-tshod bcu-gnyis);
the eight planets representing the weekdays (bza'-drgyad); and the twenty-eight constellations (rgyu-skar nyer-brgyad).
Ch. 22 Natal Horoscope (tshes-rabs las-rtsis; ff. 160-227): Plates 3–6 (Ms 1: ff. 13–30), 16 (Ms 11: ff. 1-5).
Ch. 23 Marriage (bag-rtsis; ff. 228–247): Plates 7–9 (Ms 1: ff. 29–38), 17 (Ms 11: ff. 6–10).
Ch. 24 Obstacle Years (skeg-rtsis; ff. 248–273): Plates 9 (Ms 1: ff. 37–41), 17–19 (Ms 11: ff. 6-18).
Ch. 25 Ill-health (nad-rtsis; ff. 274–299): Plate 10 (Ms 1: ff. 42–47).
Ch. 26 Thirty Chinese and Tibetan Computational Charts (rgya-bod skor-'go sum-cu; ff. 300–313): Plate 14 (Ms 1: ff. 1–2).
Ch.27 Thirteen Charts of Bal-mo lding-skor (bal-mo-lding-skor, ff. 314-329): Plate 15 (Ms 1: f. 59).
Ch. 28 Miscellaneous Minor Divinations (brtags-phran sna-tshogs; ff. 330–342): not represented in Ms.
Ch. 29 Death (gshin-rtsis; ff. 343–418): Plates 11-13 (Ms 1: ff. 48–58), 19–20 (Ms 11: ff. 16-24).
Ch. 30 Impact of the Hour of Divination (dus-rtsis; ff. 419–440): Plates 9–10 (Ms i: ff. 39–47), 20–22 (Ms 1: ff. 19–35).
Ch. 31 Spirit Lords of the Soil (sa-bdag, ff. 441–480; also ff. 75–84): Plates 3–8 (Ms 1: ff. 13–36).
Ch. 32 Geomancy (sa-dpyad; ff. 481–520): not represented in Ms.



20
The White Beryl
The Svarodaya fragment
Accompanying this manuscript on elemental divination is a fragment (six folios) of a manuscript on martial conquest. These folios appear
to be all that survives of what was probably a fairly long manuscript. Two of the folios (ff. 47–48) depict eight of the forty-two main
Svarodaya charts, while one (f. 4) exquisitely illustrates the Saivite origins of Svarodaya, and the remaining three contain related text and
colophon. This series may well have been based on Dus-ram-pa 'Chi-med bde-ba’s aforementioned commentary, Lag-len nor-phreng,
since the colophon interestingly states that it was one of his commentaries alongside the work of another of his teachers (named Drung-
pa rDo-rje) that inspired sMon-'gro Tshe-dbang Don-grub to prepare the annotations and captions for that particular series of
Svarodaya charts. This latter figure is perhaps to be identified with the sMon-'gro Pandita, who is included among the teachers and con-
temporaries of Dalai Lama v (1617–1682).95
The applied methodology of divination
༄༅། །ནད་རྩིས་རྡེའུ་བཅུ་དགུ་བསྐོར་བ་ལས། བརྩི་བྱ་མེ་འབྲུག
བརྩི་བྱ་མེ་འབྲུག གནམ་ལོ་ས་སྟག ཟླ་བ་ཤིང་རྟ ཞག་པོ་ཤིང་འབྲུག དུས་ཚོད་མ་བྱ།
སྲེག ས་
སྲོག་གི་དར་གུད། ན་བ x མངལ་གནས ox དུར་ཞུགས |xx ཁྲུས་བྱེད ༠༠
ལུས ས ས ༠ ཅ༠x མ་ ༧༠ ས་
ལུས་ཀྱི་དར་གུད། ན་བx མངལ་གནས ༠x དུར་ཞུགས ཁྲུས་བྱེད
གཟ༢ ཟླ་བ།
སྐརམ ས་རི། ། ལྷ་མོ་འོད་ལྗང་མ།
Above A model divination chart as employed by the sMan-rtsis-khang
institutes in Tibet and India. Such charts are now generated from a
computer database
Astrologers or diviners (rtsis-pa) in Tibetan society are frequently, but by no means invariably, ordained monks. They may be affiliated to
monasteries, lay communities, or to one or other of the renowned sMan-rtsis-khang institutes where the study and application of
Tibetan medicine and astro-divination are fully integrated. An important function of the astrologer-cum-diviner is the preparation of the
complex Tibetan calendar and the annual almanac (lo-tho) which accompanies it. Such practical manuals contain simplified calculations
based on the significant themes of both Indian astrology and Chinese elemental divination, and examples of the genre have been studied
in detail by Philippe Cornu in his Tibetan Astrology (Shambhala, 1997). Traditionally, almanacs have been prepared at Sa-skya, mTshur-
phu, dPal-spungs, sMin-grol-gling and Lhasa. (Scholars at the sMan-rtsis-khang in Lhasa and Dharamsala are currently preparing
databases that will facilitate the future preparation of these annual almanacs.) In addition, more detailed divinations may be commis-
sioned by specific individuals on the themes of natal horoscope, marriage, obstacle years, ill-health, death, or the appropriate time for
building projects, travelling, moving house, agriculture, business ventures and so forth.
Before any divination can be undertaken, certain preliminaries should be observed. Firstly, dreams should
be inspected and recognised as auspicious or inauspicious, according to the criteria outlined in White Beryl, f. 419b. If the signs
are unclear, incense smoke should be offered and ablutions performed, and the inspection of dream signs should then be
repeated. Secondly, various tests should be undertaken to determine the presence or absence of demonic influences both prior to and
during the initial dialogue with the subject, and while the diviner is on the way to meet the subject (lam-rtags). Among these, it is
important for the diviner to observe whether the subject is leading a dog or some other animal, whether the subject has an empty
container in his or her hands, what type of headwear, clothing or weapon the subject has, what position or demeanour is assumed by
the subject's head or face, whether the subject holds a black container while speaking, whether he or she gesticulates with the hands
while speaking, and so forth, as described in the Svarodaya and other treatises. Other preliminaries concern the place in which the
divination is made.
As for the time at which the divinations are undertaken, in general they should be carried out during the waxing
phase of the lunar month, and in the morning to determine past signs, in the afternoon to determine future signs, and around noon to
determine present events. Both the diviner and the subject should be well focused, and food should be offered to local deities, or else
smoke-offerings (bsangs) of fragrant juniper incense and gtor-ma cake-offerings should be dedicated. Both the diviner and the subject
should face the correct direction, while the prescribed seats are to be used and the appropriate divinatory mat should be employed for
placement of the pebbles.
During the actual divination, certain incidental signs are deemed to be auspicious and others inauspicious. For
example, euphonic human or animal sounds heard coming from above are auspicious, while gentle or deep sounds coming from below are
demonic, and harsh sounds from above are associated with the protector deities. Other omens refer to passers-by who may interrupt the
divination process. For example, if a well-dressed man appears, Mahādeva will be propitious and the male line will flourish; if a beauti-
fully adorned modest women appears, the nāga spirits will be propitious, and the treasury will increase; whereas if a child appears there
will be afflictions due to the'u brang spirits.
A homage is then made to the buddhas, the lineage-holders of elemental divination, and all the particular deities
associated with the directions, animal signs, elements, trigrams, numeric squares, planets and constellations, inviting them to be present,
conjoined with offering prayers and confession prayers (White Beryl, ff. 424a-425a).
Actual divinations can then be undertaken – among them the natal horoscope known as the divination of past
lives and past actions (tshe-rabs las-rtsis; f. 425a/b), the divination concerning marriage (bag-rtsis; ff. 425b-426a), the divination of obsta-
cle years (lo-gcig keg-rtsis; f. 426a-b), the divination of ill-health (thang-shing bya-bar nad-rtsis; f. 426b), the Thirty Chinese and Tibetan
Computational Charts (rgya-bod skor-'go sum-cu; ff. 426b-427a) and the Thirteen Charts of Bal-mo lding-skor, which vary according to
the subject's occupation or status, along with their appended divinations concerning travel (byes-'gro), the hidden points of the mind
(thugs-kyi gab-tshe rtsis-mig), the hidden turtle (rus-sbal gab-pa'i rtsis) and so forth (f. 427a/b), and finally the divination of death (gshin-
rtsis, ff. 4276–428a), and geomancy (sa-dpyad brtag-pa; f. 428a).
White, black and neutral or mottled pebbles (rdel/ rde'u) were traditionally deployed corresponding to the various
types of relationship formed between the elements, trigrams, numeric squares and animal signs in the context of these divinations. In the
schematic charts that are utilised nowadays these pebbles are represented by inscribed noughts and crosses. Generally speaking, the
‘mother’-relationship, which is deemed to be the most excellent, is symbolised by three noughts, followed on a sliding scale by the
‘friend-relationship, represented by two noughts; the identity’-relationship of earth or water, represented by one nought; the ‘son’-rela-
tionship, symbolised by one nought and one cross; the ‘identity’-relationship of fire, iron or wood represented by one cross; and, lastly,
the enemy'-relationship, which is the most inauspicious, represented by two crosses. In this book, model schematic charts are included to
illustrate the calculations employed in natal horoscope, marital compatibility, obstacle years, ill-health, death and computational charts.
These have been adapted from Tibetan charts produced by the sMan-rtis-kang Institute.
After tallying the pebbles or symbolic noughts and crosses in the context of a given chart, the diviner may then
calculate the pebbles of conclusive analysis (btang-gcod rde'u) and determine the appropriate divinatory prognoses or readings (kha-dmar)



21
Introduction
Above Detail of the Svarodaya fragment, showing Sākyamuni Buddha
flanked by Maheśvara and Umādevī (on the left) and Karmasiddhi
Utpala (on the right), progenitors of the Svarodaya divination system
by consulting the corresponding chapters of the White Beryl commentary. Many of these predictions are immediately intelligible regard-
less of the cultural context and period in which they were formulated, while others now appear arcane, remote from empirical observa-
tion, and in need of further interpretation. Thus we read of afflictions due to various classes of demons or evil spirits: serpentine water
spirits (nāga), plague-causing spirits (gnyan), haunting spirits (bstan), king spirits of anger (rgyal-po), spirits of attachment (bsen-mo),
bewitchers ('gong-po), primordial bewitchers (ye-'brog), malign goblins (the 'u-brang), imprecatory female spirits (ma-mo), snow mountain
goddesses (brtan-ma), countryside gods (yul-lha), hostile gods (dgra-lha), ancestral spirits (mtshun), ghosts of murder victims (gre-bo), life-
long companion gods ('go-lha), spirits of treachery (srl), devouring spirits (za-'dre) and the geomantic spirit lords of the soil (sa-bdag).
In general, a distinction is made between outer demons, who cause external obstacles and impediments; inner
demons, who provoke ill-health; and secret demons, who are identified with agitated thoughts or dissonant mental states. 36 The cate-
gories of outer demon, which have just been enumerated, are predominantly the nature spirits representing Tibet's valleys, mountains,
trees, rivers, lakes and so forth; these should be left undisturbed if bad outcomes are to be avoided. As Philippe Cornu rightly observes,
“the Tibetans are concerned to respect a magical ecology'.87
While some of these demons are considered to be of Indic origin, most are indigenous forces which were bound
under oaths of allegiance by the Bon-po and later by Buddhist masters such as Padmasambhava.38 Among them, the nāgas are a class of
serpentine water spirits frequenting rivers, lakes and springs who may provoke leprosy and other diseases if their abode is polluted, or if
irrigation projects are misapplied. The gnyan are malign plague-causing spirits of which eighteen types are recognised in Tibetan medi-
cine. 39 They frequent trees, copses, top-soil and woodlands, and are agitated if their domain is infringed. The bstan are haunting spirits
who frequent rocks and boulders and are appeased by symbolic blood- or meat-offerings. The king spirits (rgyal-po) are the irate reso-
nance of evil potentates or monks who have broken their vows. The twelve brtan-ma are the female spirits embodying the great snow
ranges of Tibet. The the'u-rang are a class of malign celestial goblins or elementals who inflict illness upon children and cause disunity.
The yul-lha are the deities of specific rural localities. The ma-mo (Skt. mātaraḥ) are carnivorous animal-headed goddesses who execute
curses and imprecations. The sman-mo are lake-dwelling medicinal mermaids who mentally disturb young girls. The dgra-lha are hostile
warrior spirits epitomised by the militant culture hero Gling Ge-sar. The 'go-lha are a five-fold group of life-long deities whose function
is to support their human host for the duration of life itself, accompanying the body in a shadow-like manner. The gre-bo are the haunting
ghosts of disembodied murder victims who remain trapped between death and rebirth. The mtshun are the ancestral spirits of the family,
which may be male (pho-lha) or female (mo-lha). Finally, the subterranean spirit lords of the soil (sa-bdag) comprise diverse classes which
move their position according to the cycle of the years, months, days or hours, and which provoke certain repercussions if their geoman-
tic space is infringed. 40
Lying at the heart of all these understandings is the notion of ‘auspicious coincidence' (rten-'brel). From the
Buddhist point of view, the term rten-'brel refers to the twelve links of dependent origination (pratītyasamutpāda) through which
past actions bring about present and future results within the course of cyclic existence. 41 The derivative meaning of 'auspicious coinci-
dence' popularly refers to miraculous or supernatural events or to unexpected coincidences. In many schools of Buddhism the
absolute truth or emptiness (sūnyatā) underlying phenomena is contrasted with their relative appearances. It is said that Buddhist astrol-
ogy was taught by Mañjughosa in order to intimate the absolute by way of the relative for the sake of beings who are unable to realise
emptiness directly.
Although the modality of ‘auspicious coincidence' frequently requires an act of faith that sceptics or rationalists
may be unable or unwilling to make, it is important to bear in mind that the predictions are not considered to be deterministic, but cau-
tionary and prescriptive. If the outcome is auspicious, no action need be taken, but if the portents are negative, the subject is strongly
advised to undertake the appropriate counteracting rites which have the power to nullify those negative influences. Such rites include
the recitation of well-known Buddhist scriptures and mantras of retention (gzungs), the offering of purificatory smoke (bsangs) or
inscribed prayer-flags (rlung-rta), and the making of thread-crosses (mdos) for ritual exorcism, alongside amulet charts ('khor-lo),
talismanic seals (phyag-rgya 42 or good-luck charms (gto) in the form of gtor-ma offering cakes which are dedicated or cast out in order
to appease malign forces. 43



22
The White Beryl
ན ་ ང་བ་ ༣ ང་ཚ ང བའི ཀྐད་བ་ དང༌
ཡི་རང་བྱ་ བ་འདྲེ་བཀོ ན ཁྲི ༣ བྱིདྷའབྲ རུས་
notes
1
.
༽།
1gR ]e194317/1?f1 21 1334 18322/22342
༄༅།། ད རྒྱ ལ ཀ ༨ ༈ ད བྷོན པ ཨཱི ཚེ ཆུ ཆེ སེ ཏེ །
1:། ་་1ིམ་གནསླཀརིའི་ལུང་་་ ་ནས་༨a{འཁྲམུ་ནེའིtན་ལཙ༢༥ for
1327Igl9Ilacl/dil]g3l23dfajgye 1
1, སུ སྐོ་མོ་ བཏ རྟ བྱཱ ཉྙོ གྲུ ར ཏཱ ལྦེ་ ཏུ ལ ཀྱི ག ངའི།།
40.jཔི་(Ts:བྱུང་བ་དུས་ཡཆེ་འབེན་འདུས། ཧེ༔ པ ས ་ བ ད ''སྨི《འn i< ཤུཀླ
21 272225??a༡p??723 J4d323454t ༧ ལེཝ#si]3
1:| པཊ ལྟ ལྟར སྤ ཏ ཀེཤཱདྭཔ :|:ཨཱ ལཾ རུ༣ : ཤ པ
༥ .:/nིན{ཀ3 iའབྱུང་༦༡༩ སྐྱེས་བ་རྒྱུའི་ཀུན། ཧངེས་ཀན(འཇི (བའི་གནས་༠༣་༡༥11-་སྤྱ,
The numbers against the plates refer to the figures.
Folio dimensions:10.8x 60.7 cm.
།
Folios1-2 appear on Plate 14.
་་་
2] ༡ -3#did ]18}འི་ཉི ཏི {1 8 ）
འི ་ ཡ ༢ བྱས – ཤུལ་ཀཱ རྒྱུ ད ཧཱ ༽ ཤ ཧེ ྋ ལ ༢༨ད་ཀྱི།
-1 ༢) ):|:-1) 4 ༤༥. ས ་ པ ན ་བ་་ ད་རུཀྱང དད a (དུ་འཁྱ3 ( 1 ཏི ། །
2il@ita?ལོ་ glqFleidzgpQ474hl@diaanga
༡ པུསཱ བྱ ཡཱ ཙིཏ '' ཏནམཱ མ པྲ ཏ ཀཱ ཀ ༡ བྱ པྲ“དས མེ་
1:|: 2:དྲིན©རེ ལེ ད ་བ་ཡར 5 1:|:#t:མྱུན་ཕེit༨ ༢༠༡༧་༡་ཤི་མ;ས ：; གའི ཉི ( 4 (ང་
Hijाशमादिदिन-कान माया पवितन्नूबालसाजराकृतिनका
ཛཱིཆདེ བ ལ ཁ པ ར་རི་ ལ་ ལ ལསན སུཏི ༔ བི ནཱ །
༣ ༽ ས to ཀླུང༌པ ༨ པར སྒྱུ་རR/ ལས་༤ ༽ དུ ( 1 12 1diy 11 1 1140 tfོ ག དུ ། །
D
བྱ་
ནི་
པ་
e
ztco5
DAN
ལུགས་ཆེན་ལྔའི་གལགས།
འཆད་ཆེན་གྱི་ལེ།
ནང་འབྱུང།
ཤང་ |
4
ནད་
འབྲུག། ཁྱི། ལུག། བན
ས་ག་ 1: ས། ཙུག་རྒྱུ། གླང། ཝུག་བྱ།
མ་ཕྱི་
གསུང་འབྱུང།
དབངཝི་སག
།
བུ་ལེ།
གྲོགས་མེ། གུངོལ། 9
ངོགྲ་བོ།
མར་ནིའཕྲུལུག བྱད སྨྲ་ གི་ཕག ཕྱག། དེས་
བྱ་སྲེ། ཞི བ། སྟག་ཡིག
ཐག་ སྦྱག། ཨས། སྦྲུལ། རྟ སྨདྷཱཏུ་འབྲལ་
་
སུག་དང་ལས་ཀྱི
གཅག་པ་ལ་ཡན་
སུག་པརབསག།
དུ་འ9
ག་འདྲ་བ་
ཀུནས་བ
རྒྱུ་ཞིང་
། ། ས
པས།
འི་
ང༽
ཟླ་བ་སོ་དྲུག་ལ་སྟག་ག་ཚེས།
ལགས།
ལ། །
*
Plate 1 Ms.l, ff. 3-5
Mount Wu Tai Shan and aspects of the turtle divination chart
Figures are discuSsed below as folloWS: fig.1, Introduction; fig. 2, Part |; figs 3-8, Pat]l



29
The Plates
300
ABSENY
Kyprocess
and
CAC
988
900
IN
IN
2
Plate 2 Ms. I, ff. 6–12
The hidden points of the turtle divination chart
Figures are discussed below as follows: fig. 1, Part I; figs 2-5, Part II



24
The White Beryl
༡༩སྐུརམཆས་ཝང་ལྡེ་འཕྲུལ་རྒྱལ} (༤ཉེ;22
སྐ82%D
«ག་བག་4། ན་ཏུན་པའི་ལྕང་<་རྒྱ།
༢༢༥་་ །
སེའཔ སེ་ལོ།
ཧལ་ཀྱི་ ནུ་མོ།སེ་བ་བླ་མཁྱེན། བཤེར་འོ
ག་སྐད་
བྱ་ར་བ
སེཤར་
ཀུནa3d
མི་ལོ་ས་མ་
སེ་བ་བྱིན སེ་བྱེ་
sw@ན་འཕe
03ངསྐུངས།
1མཁྱེན་ཡོ4
གངམ་མས།
སོང།
ཟིན9པས་རྒྱལ་
བཞུ་གཅིག་
སེ་བ་བླ་མཁྱེན། ཏི་སོ་
སོགས་གསན།
ཏི་སེའི་
ལི། འཚེ་མགཔ།
ཝི་ཨ་ནི་གང་
སྨོན་ལང་ཀs
ཁྱིམགོ་
བྱ་ས་འཛིན་ གས་ཚུལ*
ཐེ་ཝིནbཡི་བྱི་
བ་ཨེའོ
རྟཙཁྲིར་ནང༌
གུམཐུ་མཁྱེན་ནང་
aཆེན་གསང་
ཆེས་མས་པེ་ཅིང་ཀུན་འཕྱེའོ།།
ཉེས ཀུས་སུལLཀྱི་
གནའདྲི་བྱས།
་བསྟག་
མངརྟ་རྟཡིད་བྱར་བ།
ཙངཤུན་འཁྱེའོ། །
སྐྱེ་བ་བླ་མཁྱེན་ ཀ་ལ་འོ་ཟན། །
ཞར་བདུདགཤེད་པོ།
འམ་
སྟག་གཟིག་
སྟག་གཟིག།
བྱསེས་༣བར་
གཤིན་རྗེ།
སgབངས་
སྟག་གཟིག་ནག་མོ།
ཚེ།
ད་དུང་
དེ་ལ་
༄༅། སྤོར་ཁ།
པ། སྨེ་བ།
སྲོག་ཕ་མ་ལྷ།
བུ་ཚ་དཔལ།
མཐུན་པ་ཚེ།
ཐུབ་པ་འདེ།
མི་ཐུབ་བདུད་
ན་ལུསན་པ་མ་ལྷ།
བུ་ཚ་དཔལ།
མཐུནབ་ཚེ།
ཐུབ་པ་འདེ།
མི་ཐུབ་བདུད། །
དབང་ཐང་པ་བད
བུ་ཚ་དཔལ།།
མཐུན་པ་ཚེ་
ཐུབ་པ་འདྲ།
རྒྱལ་པོ་མཚོན་ཐོགས་
| རྣག་གོ གལཔོ་ན། སྐྱེ་བ་ཐོན་བྱིས་པ་རྟ་དར་
ལྷ་དཔལ་ཚེ་བདུད་རྩི་བའི་བའི་སྤར་ཁ་བསྟན།
s ལྷ་དཔལ་ཚེ་བདུད་བརྩི་བའི་སྐྱེ་བ་བསྟནད་མ
ཚེའི་ཉི་མ་འཆར་ལོ་བདུན་ཅུ་བརྒྱལ ་ལ་
ཉི་མ་སྨིན་བྲལ་དྲུག་ཅུ་རྩ་གཅིག་ཐུབ།
29 ཉི་མརར་བསྐྱོད་ཚེ་སྐྱལ་འཁྲིའི་བཞི་བཅུ་ཞེ་དགུ་འདའ།
ཙཉི་མ་ན་སྒྲིབ་གསུམ་ཅུ་རྩ་བདུན་མ་བརྒལ།།
༈ ཚེསལ་དུ་བ་བཙས་མ་ཐག་ལ་འཆི། །
༄༅།གཟུགས་བཟང་ལ་བྱང་བཞིན་ལེགས་ཉམས་ཤིང་
༄།ལུས་སྐལ་རྒྱས་ཆུ་ངས་གསེས་ཉམས་ཤིང་བདེ། །
༄༅།་ལུས་སྐལའབྲིང་གཟུགས་བཟང་བྱད་བཞིན་ལེགས་དང་ལུས་རང་གི་བྱ་
། ལས་སྐལ་བམཆུང་དུས་གསོ་དགོནཚམེད། །
༄།ལུས་སྐལ་ཆད་ལྗོན་ཤིང་ཆག་སྟེ་གཟུགས་ངན་བཙེངགས་ཟིན།
༄༅།སྐལ་བ་ལྷག་མཚོ་རྒྱས་ཕུ་ནོབལྡན་བྲན་འཁོར་གས་པ་ཡིན།
༈།དབང་སྐལངས་བུ་བཟང་ཞེར་བྲིང་གཡདབློན་ལ་འབད།
༄༅།ཟས་ནོར་གྱི་སྐལ་བ་འབྲིང་ནོར་བའང་བུ་འབྲིང་དཔལ་བསྐྱེད་དང་སྲིད་ཕུར་ཐོགས།
དབང་སྐལ་དམན་བུ་མོ་ལྷག་ཚད་དང་གོ་ལ་གང་སྟེ་ངོས་རྒྱུན་མི་ཆད།
སྐུལྟཆ་སྤྱི་མཚོསྐམས་བུ་འདུན་བཅས་ཀྱམཐའ་རབསད་
ཨ་ཡིགང་ལོབ་ལམ་སྣ་འདྲེན་ལུང་སྐལ་ལྷག་བསམ་དགུ་འགྲོ་
། ཀུངོསྐལ་རྒྱས་མི་ཁ་བྱམས།
བྷཆུ་སྐལ་འབྲིང་ཐབ་དང་ཡིག་ཚང་བ་ཐར་ལམ་སྣ་འདྲེན། །
།ཀླུང་སྐལ་ལམ་བྱས་བས་འབུ་གའཕྱི་བྱམས་ནང་མི་སྡང་། །
༈ཀླུང་སྐལ་ཆད་སྐྱིད་སྡུག་མང་དོན་མི་གྲུབ་མི་ཁེ་ལྡང་བས་ན།།
མི་ཐུབ་བདུད་
ཀླུང་རྟ་ཕ་མ།
བུ་ཚེ་དཔལ།
མཐུན་པཚོ
ཐུབ་པ་འདྲེ།
མི་ཐུབ་བདུད།
ཕ་མེས་ལ།
རྒྱུ་མ་ཚོམས།
ས་
རྒྱམ་གྱེན་དུ་ཆོས་བའི་གཏོ་གསང་བ་ཀུན་འདུས་བྱ།
རླམ་ཁྱེན་སྟོངས་བཏིང་བུ་མོའི་འགྲོ་ལཁོང་ལ་དག་མགྱོགས་ཀྱི་གཏོ་བྱ།
ལྟ་རྒྱམ་གྱིན་སྡོད་པའི་སྲིད་སྐྱོམས་སྐྱེསྒྲུབ་ཆད་བཟློག་བ་དངཤི་ཁབྱའོས་བདག་
།རྒྱམ་གྱིས་ཁ་རལ་ཤི་སྒཁམིང་འཁོར་ལོ་ལྔ་མགྱོགས་ཀྱི་གཏོ་བཏང་།
གSལ་ལཚུག་གཏུབ་
རྒྱུ་མ་སྡོད།
རྒྱ་མ་ཁ་རལ།
ཕ་མེས་ལོ་
།
རྒྱམ་ཚོམས།
བྱ་ཆམ་ཕུར་ཚེལ་བས་མི་འཕེལ་གཏོགས་དེབ་ཀུན་འདུས་བྱ།
རྒྱ་མི་སྟོང་
རྒྱམ་སྡོད།
།རྒྱ་མ་ཐུང་སྟེངས་པའི་གླུང་བུམང་འགྲོ་འཁོར་ལོ་དགུ་མགྱོགས་ཀྱི་གཏེ་བྱ།
།རྨས་བུར་སྡོད་པའི་སྲིད་སྐུམས་སྐྱེ་སྒྲུབ་ཚང་བཟློག་བ་ད་ཤི་ཁ་བྱའོ་ས་ཁད་
གཡུལ་འཁྲུག་གཏོ་བཏང་། ཞི་
ཕ་རྒྱམ་ཐུང་ཁ་རལ་ཞི་སྒྲུབ་མཆོད་འཁོར་ལོ་ལྔ་མགྱོགས་ཀྱི་གཏོ་
རྒྱམ་ཁ་རལ།
ཕ་མེས་ལ།
རྒྱུ་མ་ཚོམས།
རྒྱུ་ལྷུང
་རྒྱམ་ཕྲེང་ཚོམ་པས་མི་འཕེལ་ལྟེ་གསང་བ་ཀུན་འདུས་བྱ།
རྒྱམ་ཕྲེང་སྟེས་པའི་ཀླུང་བུ་མོར་འགྲོ་ལ་ཁོ་ལེ་དགུ་མགྲོན་གྱི་གཏོ་བཏང༌།
བརྒྱབ་ཕྲེདསྡེད་པའི་སྲིད་སྙམ་གྱི་སྒྲུབ་ཆད་བཟློག་པ་དང་ཤི་ཁ་བྱེའོ་ས་བདག་
གཡུལ་འཁྲུག་གཏོ་བཏང༌།
།རྒྱམ་ཕྲེང་ཁ་རལ་ཤི་སྒྲུབ་མཆོད་འཁོར་ལེ་ལྔམགྱོས་ཀྱི་གཏོ་བཏང༌། །
རྒྱ་མ་ལྡོག་པ།
རྒྱ་མ་ཁ་རལ།
Plate 3Ms. |, ff. 13-15
Natal horoscope with the sexagenary cycle and geomantic aspects
Figures are discussed below as follows: fig. 1, Part I; fig. 2, Part II; figs 3-4, Part III; figs 5-6, Part IV



25
The Plates
ན་ཀུ་གཅུག་ཚད་འཆར། མ
་རུང་སྙིང་རྣམ་
༥
༨པ་རྒྱ་གར་
སོ ག རང ར ར
༣༽༽
༢
སུ་གst༣་༢33<ན།k@y །
ཀྱི་རྒྱ་ནག་སློབ་དཔོན་འབར་ཚོན་ཚོམ།བོད་མི་རིགས་ཀྱིས་རྒྱབ་པའི་དཔས།
མn
ཉུངསསྩལ།
གལཚོམས།
ཨིན་མས། །
ཏེ་སོ་སྲས་བོ། །
ཁནི་གངས་རི།
བྱང་མའི་དམིན། །
བྱ་ར་བ།
མི་ལིང་།
སེཤ་།སེམྱོ།
ནམག་ད །
ལྷ་སེ་རའི་གདན
་
NB
སོ་བྱ་དུམ་འཛིན།
།
ན་ལསུ་ར།
གསསྐུལ
ཐེ་ཝི་ཧང་ཞི་གདན་
wད
ན་
ལས་ཕྱག་
ཅན
བརྩི་འོ་མག་བ། ཟུང་
བླམིན་ཞིང་།དུས་
སྟེ་བྱ་དུས་འཛིན།
ནི་གསབ་
ནང་གིང་མང་པོ།
ས་
3
མས།
སའི་བུ་མོསག་བ།
ཟིན་ཕུང་། པི་ལིང༌།
་
ས་རྒྱལ་བཅུ་གཅིག།
རང་ན་འད།
ས་ནས་
སེ་བྱ་དུས་ལན།
ཤམཁྱེན་གསོ།
ལྡེ། སེ་བྱི། །
ཉག་དཞི་བློན་ཡིའུ་
འཆོར་
བྷེ་ཕྱིས་ཏེ་ནོ་སྲས་པོ།
་་་
ཕྱི་མགོ་གངས་མྱལ རྐྱེན་
གཞིའམ
གང་
ཚོན་ཀ་གླུ་བ་རྟེན།
ས་གནས།
ཆེན་སེམས་གབ་
མ5ཡི་རན།
ཙན་
ན་ཕུང་།ས་རྒྱལ་
བཅུ་གཅིག།
སེར ང་ནན་
བྱར་བ། ༥་ལིང་
།
གསཞན་
སྨེ་བ་བླ་མཁྱེན།
ཀ་མ་རོ་ཟན།
ར༌བས་
གཞིན་ཡོད
། རྒྱལ་བོ་མཚོན་ཐོགས་
སྟག་གཟིག།
སྡུག་གཟིགསྣག་མོ་
wམན་
སྟག་གཟིག་ནག་མོ།
ནདཞུངབཤང་པེ།
གཤིན་རྗེ། ནག་མོ།
ནད་བདུད་
བསམ།
ས་ལོ་རནང་
ཞར་བདུངས་ཤིང།
ཀའོན་
སྨེ་བ།ཐ་མཁྱེན།
ཞེས་
ཁབས་སྦར།
ལབ་ལས་
གསལ།
[།
ལས
»wས»
ད༠
o
ནs ༡༤ ༣༠ ནས་
ལསo༠༤༠༨ ཉ6 @
YI
)
00
ད
EI
Plate 4Ms. 1, f. 16-19
Natal horoscope with the sexagenary cycle and geomantic aspects
Figures are discussed below as follows: fig. 1, Partl; fig. 2, Part II; figs 3-4, Part III; figs 5-8, Part IV



26
The White Beryl
ཅར་གནན་ཡིན་ན་ཆས་༢པ།
ར་ཡི་རྣམཁྱེན་གསལ་ལ་མཚོའི་རི་མོ་《སྒོ་ཆོས་འབུ་
ན་མོ་སྟོང་གྱུར་སོང་ཆ
ང ་རགྱུས་ཀྱི་དབུ་ཚུད་ལྷ།
《སན་པ་ཉིད། ལང་ཚོ་གར་འདུ་དར་མ་
2
L་།
ཁྱིམའོ་ཐེན་གསཔ༌སྦེ་ཁྱིམ་བཙུན་མོ་
ཙཀུན་འབྲེལོསི་མས་པེ་
ན ཐེ་སེ་ཞེ ན་
ཡིས་བྱ་རུབ་
ས
བང་རྟ་རྟ་ཁྲིད་
རྒྱུ ན་བོ་ཙང་ཀུན།
སྦེ་ཁྱིམ་བྱིན་
བྱམས་པ༌ཆུ་རྟ་ཧ་ཀྱི་བུ་མོ།
ཞིང་ལྷང་གི་སྙིངམག་བ།
འཕུ
ཞིན་ཕུང་པི་ལིང༌། ། རྩེ་ལ་རྒྱུ་མཁྱེན་ཏེ་
འགའ།
སངས་མ་རྒྱལ་༡༡
འམཁྱེན་ཝིན།
ནུ་པཱf
ཉིན་ཉེ་པོ། ཀུས་ཡུལ།
སེམས་བྱ།
དམག་མིན།
རྗེ་སེ་ཧནི།གདན་
འདིས། འཁྲིག།
ཧལ་ཁྱི།བུམ།མག་པ།
མ་རྒྱལ་བཅུ་གཅིག
ཀློན་པོ་ཚབཙུན་པ། ཀུགསྩཙམཐུན་
ཚུ་ཁ། འཕུའོ།༧མགོ་ཟླ་
མཁྱེན་གམང༌།
ཐེ་ཁྱིམ་དེས་སྲས་པོ།
སེ་པ་མ་མཁྱེན།
ང་གིས་
སེ་བྱ་བས་འཛིན།
ཙང་ཀུན་འཕྱེ འོད་
ཧལ་ཁྱི་བུལོ།མག་བ། །
ཁྱིམགོ།
བློམ་གནང་།
བློ་མཁྱེན་ནད་
ཨི་བ་ཐམཁྱེན་པས་
ཚམཁྱེན་གསང་།
gམེ་གངཤེ་གདན་འདིས།
སེ་བྱ་དུས་འཛིན།།
སེ་ལ་མ་འཐུག།
པས
སེ་བ་བོན་སེ་ཕྱི།
མཁྱེན་ཡིའུ་
1སེམསེལ་ས།
ལཕྱགདུངསམྱལ
ཧལ་ཁྱི་ལུམོ་མག་པ།
ནའང
ཧང་ཕན་བྱ་རའ། 1
པི་ལིc།
སྒྲུང་།ས་རྒྱལ་ན་དེའི་
གཅིག།
སི
ཏེ་མི་སྲས་མོ།
ལ་ས་འཕུལ།།
ཀུངས་ཚུལ།
ah།
མེད།
སེ་བྱི། ཀུཡུལ་ས་རྒྱལ་འཉིག།
བླམཁྱེན་པ ཐ་མཁྱེན་གསང༌། །
ས
ནལ་བ
སེར་སེཁྱུ་
1 དམག་དཔོན1
2ནག་
ནད་འདུད། །
བྱིས་བ་རྒྱུ་འདུད།།
བ
ནད་འདུར་གཤང་བོ། ། བྱིས་པ
སྟག་གཟིག་ནགམོ་
སྟག་གཟིག།
ཀ་ལ་རོའན་
གཏབརུས་ ཀཀར་ནགསི། གཤིང་སེ་
རྒྱལ་པོ་མཚོན་ཐོགས།
|
།
གཤིནམག་མི།
རྒྱལ་པོ་མཚོན་ཐོགས།
སྟག་གཟིག་
གཤེད་པ།
ན་མརོཟན།
ནག་མོ།
གཤིང་པརུང་འདོས།
མགགག
སླེ་གgམཁྱེན།
ལན།
སྟག་གཟིག།
| ཕམའི་ལོ།
ཁུ་ཚའིལ།
༄།ཕ་མའི་ལོ
༈། བུཚའི་ལོ།
བ།བཟང་པོའི་མིང་དེའི་མིང་ཤ།སྣང་གསལ་འོདཔེམ། ཀམཐོ་བསང་དབང་
ཙམདུང་རྩེསྲིནམོརྐང༌། སྦརྒྱ་མཚོགཏིང་མེད། །དབག་བསཾསེང་རྒྱས།
༄༅།ངན་བའི་འབྲས།
ཁྱུ་ཚེ་ཐུབའཕྲལ་ཕུགས་ངན།
༄༅།ཚེ་བྱུང་འཕྲལ་ཕུགས་ངན།
| བུ་ཚའི་ལོ་
*།སྐྱེས་སྦྱར། །
༄༅། ཁམས་བཞི།
ཕུགསན། ༄༅།ཚེ་ཐུང་འཕྲལ་ཕུགས་ངན།
སྐྱེས་སྤར་
སྐྱེས་ལ་
།སྐྱེས་སྤར།
༄།ལོ་ཡིཀླུངས་ནནི།
པt
ལོ་ངགའི་སྤཔཁ་
cའགས་མའ
F། འབྲས་བུ།
གྱུརང་གིས་བསོད་
ནས་བསགས་
གྲུ་དང་གང་ལའང9།ཉེ་འཁོར་ནོར་ལ་ཤ།
མོ་ཕྱོགས་ལ་བྱམམ། གུམ་སྤྱིའི་ཡུལ་མཁར་
བ།གས་ཤུ
བྷས་བགནོད།
ན་རག
ཅ།ལུས་ཀླུས་ལྟས་
།མའི་ལ།
ནས།
་་
།་་
༡།ལྟས་ངན་འབྲིང་བེ།
༄༅། བུ་ལེ།
༄༅།།བུའི་ལོ་རྟ་དང་སྲོག་གི་མ་གཟུགས།
།འབ་འདི་རྣམས་པར་དུ་གཞོན་སར་སྐྱེས་པ་
༄༅།སྐྱེས་སུ་འདི་རྣམས་ཤིས།
༄༅།སྐྱེས་ཟླ་འདི་རྣམས་དུར་ས།
གནས་
༄། སྲོག་མའི་སྐུར་འགོ།་
7༄༅།རབ་ནས་རང་དང་ཕམར་ངན།
༄༅། འབྲིང་པོ་ཤི་ས་རང་ངམ་ཕ་མར་ན།
།ཐམང་དུངས་པ་ངམ་ཕ་མརན།
༄།ལྟས་ངན་ཆུང་བ།
ལེ་སྐྱོན་གྱི་མིང་།
ཨ་ལོ་སྐྱེན་ཆེབ།
ཟ་ལེ་སྐྱོན་འབྲིང་བ།
༄༅ལེ་སྐྱོན་ཆུང་བ།
མའི་ལེ་དང་བབས་སྦར།
།བུ་སྨིན་མའི་
༄༅།རལུལོའི་མི་
སར།
གྲས་ཟུང༌།
དབང་ཐང་འཕྲང་པའི་སྒོ་ནས་མི་གྲང་
བུ་སྐྱེས་པར་ན། །
མའི་ལེ་དང་བབསསྤང་
ཙ།བུ་ཕོ་མིའི་ལ།
༄༅།པར་སྤར་ཁའི་མི་
ཀྲུངསཟུང༌།
༄༅། བསེའུ་ལེའི་མི་
གྲུས་ཡི་བ།
༡བསེ་རུ་སླར་ཁ་
མི་གྲངས་ཡ།
༄༅།འདི་ལ་ན།
མཚབན་
দিবেন।
ནི
བ་སྐྱེད་པོ་བགྲས། ྋསྐྱེ་བོ་བགྲས། ལསྙེད་པོ་བགྲངས། ྋསྐྱེད་བེ་འབྲས
ལེ་ངན་ཐར་འཛམ་
འབa
བོའི་ལོ་གྲས།
9%2d
འགོས་རྐྱེན་མགཉིས། བ ས་བཙས་པ་ལས་བྱེ་བ་
།ལུས་རྫོགས་ཁྲུས་བྱེད་རབ་ཀྱི་
དབུགས་ལེན་མངལ་གནས་
བཞུར་ན་བ་གཉིས་ན་པའིབྲིང༌། གཞི་བུད་ཐམ་གཉིས་ངན་པའི་ཐ།
༣རབས
།
1
རབས་ཆུང།
He
བཞུན་བ་གཤེས་ན་པའིབྲིང༌། |༣ ཤི་བུད་ཐ་མགཉིས་ངན་པའི་ཐ།
མས།
3 ཆ༠
རབསརཔ།
གཡངཤམ་བབས་ཚར
༣གཡངཤམ་རབསཆད།
ད
༄༅ནང་སྤར་ཁ།
༄༅མའི་ལོ་གྲངས། ༡༧
པ་ཕྱི་ལོག་མེན།
༄༅།ནང་སྤར་ཁ། བE
བཙས་ཟླ5©
২াবাশ্রমে।
ལྟ།ཕྱི་ལོག་མེན།
༄༅།ནངསྨར་ཁ།
།མའི་ལ་གྲས།
༡།ཕྱི་ལག་མིན།
ནངོསྤཔལ།
°| སྐྱེས་སྤར་ཁ།
༈ [ སྐྱེས་སྨེ་བ།
#།སྲོག་ལུས་བང་ཐང་།
༢ སྲོག་གུང་སྲེག་ལ་དགུ་ ༣ལུས་གུད་ལུསཀྱི་དགྲ་
༄༅།ཁ་དམར་རྡེལ་ཁྱད། །
ས |ར་དུས་བཙས་པ། ར་དུས་བཙས་པ།
777
ལྕགཡངའམ་བསད། །
《གཡའམ་རབསད།
།དབང་ཐང༌།
གོས་གྱོན་པ་གཉིས་དང་བའི་ཡབ་བཙས་པ་ལ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་འབྲིང་
རྣལུས་རྫོགས་ཁྲུས་བྱེད་རབ་ཀྱིa
བཞུགསན་བ་གཉིས་ནཔའི་འབྲིང༌།
ཞ-ཞི་བད་ཐམགཉིས་ན་པའི་ཐ
ར
རྒྱུ
སལ་ལམ་བྱེད།
ལ་ལུས་རྫོགས་ཁྲུས་བྱེད་རབ་གྱི་ཤ།
བསམ་ལེgམངལ་ལས་ནམ
གསན་བ་གཉིས་ན་བའི་འབྲིང་།
། ཤིགུང་ཐམའི་ཟམ།
།
h༢།དབང་ཐངགུང་ཅིང་དབང་ཐད། ༣ ལུག་རྒྱུད་ལུས་ཀྱི་རིག་ ཌ་ཀླུང་རྟགང་ཀླུང་རྟའི་དགུ་
དག་དར་ས་སྐྱེས་པ་དང་དུས་བཙས་པ། དམདུམ་བཙས་པ།
། འབྲས་བུ།
Plate 5 Ms. |, ff. 20-24
Natal horoscope with the sexagenary cycle and geomantic aspects
Figures are discussed below as follows: fig. 1, Part 1; fig. 2, Part II; figs 3-4, Part III; figs 5–20, Part IV



The Plates
ཉིན་ཆོས་
ID།
2
།
ཤེལ་ཁང་།
༥།
ཀེ་གས།བབ།
ངཏིང་གའུ་
ཁང་།བེ་སྒོ་ལ་
ན
ས་་་
ཆགས། ཉི་
ཆ2
ང་ཙང་ན།
ཀྱང་སྐྱོན་མི་ཤེས་
གནམ་ལ་བྱ་
་
ཚོ
མཚུངས་པ་འམ།
1ས་འདསtw
ན་ཀྱང་།
འཁྲུག་ཕྱིན། བཙལ
eo
ཧexx
བ།
E ཤེར། གཉལ་
* |གཤེད། ༠༠
3ང་ཐོ་འམངའ
ཀི་ཚོགས། སཱ ། འདས་
འགན་མ་ལག་ཀྱི
མགོནུབ།
རྩང་རྩ་གསུམ་ལ་བྱ༌
རང་ངོ་མགོནུབ།
ཀ་
ཀཱན་
པ
ཤམསུ
།
ས་༢༥
བect
ཀ་ཚིགས།
ཚནས། འབར་མ་
པ །
པས་སྐུ་
རྣམ་ཤཱ8}
གླིན་གཤེར།བླ་མཁྱེན།
གསན་ནའང
ངག་མ་གཡ། ཨིན་
།ལག།
་ན
།
འ
ཛཀྱི་ལག་
འབར་མ་
ནང་བའིcངན་
བ
མངགསའབྲུག་
མུན་
མས།
ཁང་བྱམ; | སུདཀར། མགོ་བྱང་
ཡས། ས
2ལམ།
གནས་མ་
ལམིང་
མཚནང་ལས་
བསས་ཁང༌།
ཆུར་
|
གསར་དབང༌།
༠༠
བུམ། ས་ཚུན་
ད་དུང་
ར་མ་
བྱུངམིལ་དུར་ལེན་
སངསེའབཞག
འགྲོ་
ནུས་པར་བྱ་
འདུན་
ལྷགློགྱི་
ཁན་
[ཐབ་སྟེ་ནག་མོ་ནང་འད
ཏུ་སྦྱོར།
|གན་པ་འཛིན། སེ་བདུན་ཕྱིར་མ།
ན།
འགམ་མགག།
གནས།
ནརྒྱུད་རྣམས་
ཀྱིགཟུགས་
་
དེ
o
།
ཀྱི་མཚན་ཉིད་
བསྟན་པ་ནི།
ལ་ངན་ལྕགས་བཞིམ་བརྒྱད།
ལྟས་ངན་ལ་བདུན་དང་སྐར་ཆུང་ལ་
ལ་ངན་ཐན་མ་བདུན།
︽སe
བྱུརརང་ཤན་
o
ལོརནན་མོ་བཞིའང་ནག་
བུ་གསུ།ལོ་ནག་མམབ་ཅན་བཞི་
སྐྱེ་འཕྲེང་གསུམ་གྱི་འབྱུང་བ་གཉིས་ལྡན།
སྦེའཕྲེང་གསུམ་གྱི་
འབྱུང་བ་ལྔ་ལྡན།
སྲོག་མ་བཟང་བ་དྲུག།
སྲོག་མ་རན་པ་དྲུག།
སྲོག་མ་བཟང་བ་དྲག།
སློག་བུ་ངན་པ་དྲུག།
སྡུག་གྲོགས་བཟང་དྲུག། སློག་ཐོགས་ངན་དྲུག་
སྤག་དག་བཟང་དྲུག
སྤེག་དགྲ་ངན་དྲག།
མེས་པོའིག ཕའི་ལོ་བུའི་གོ ཚབོའི་
ཕ་དང་མེས་པོ་གཉིས་ནས་བུ་དང་ཚོར་བརྟག།
དཔལ་བབསམ་ལ་ཚོམ་དངོས་གྲུབ་ཐོབ།
རབསྡུས་འཕེལ་ཡང་མི་འཕེལ་རབས་ཀྱང་མི་ཆདགཅིག་བརྒྱུད་
ལུས་ཀྱིམ་བཟང་དྲུག
ལས་མ་དོན་དྲུག
ལུསབ་བཤད་
ལུས་བུ་ངནདྲག། །
ལུས་གྲགས་བཟང་བ་ཙུག། ལུས་ཀྱི་གྲོགས་ངན་དྲག།
ལུས་ངག་བཟང་དྲུག།
བྲས་དགྲ་ངན་དྲུག།
བྱུར་བབས་མི་རབས་ལྔ་ལ་རབས་ཆད།
ཤུར་བབས་བུ་ཚསྐྱེས་ཚོད་འཆི་
བྱར་བབས་ཚེ་ཐུང་འཁོར་དབུལ་ཐ་རབ་ཆད་
དབང་བུ་ཁཟང་དྲུག།
རབང་མ་བཟར་དྲུག
དབར་བུ་ངན་དྲག།
བར་གྲོགས་ཁཟང་དྲུག། དབར་གྲོགས་ངན་དྲུག།
དབར་དགྲ་ངན་དྲུག་
དབང་དགྲ་བཟང་དྲག།
ཀླུང་མ་དོན་དྲག།
སྤུར་བུ་བཟང་དྲག།
ཀླུང་གྲོགས་བཟང་དྲུག
ཀློང་མ་བཟང་དྲུག།
| ཀླུང་བུ་ངན་དྲུག་
ཀྲུང་དགྲ་བཟང་དྲུག།
ཀླུང་གྲོགས་དན་དྲག།
ཀླུང་དགྲ་དན་དྲུག།
༡
གཞན་སྨན་འགེལ་རབ་ཀྱི་རག བབས་ན་ཚེརིང་ན་ཚརགཞི
སེམས་བདེ་ཐུགས་ཁཟད་ གདོན་རྣམས་བྲལ་ཞིང་མ་
འགྲོགས་ཡུན་རིང་གདོན ཀླངས་དར་ལྷ་ལ་བཏགས་
གྱི་མི་རྒྱུགས་ ཤིང་རྒྱརྣཚབྱ། །
དཔལ་བསྙད་དཔལ་གྱི་བུ་6ཚེརིང་དང་ནོར་རྫས་འཕེལ།
ཚབྱམས། །རྒྱུད་འགྲེ ལྷོ་མ་བྱམས་ཤིང་བུ་ཚབང་
དང་བསམ་པ་འགྲོ་ལ་
སྟོང་ལྔ་འདུལ་བཙན་ཕྱག་ལྡ།
བསད་
Plate 6 Ms. |, f. 25-30
Natal horoscope and marriage, with the sexagenary cycle and geomantic aspects
Figures are discussed below as follows: fig. 1, Part 1; fig. 2, Part II; figs 3–4, Part III; figs 5–15, Part IV; fig. 16, Party



28
The White Beryl
བམས་རྒྱུན་ལུགས་འདིའི་འོས་པ་བྷུ་སུ་
རྩ་ཨ་མའན་པཚུ་མ་ལ། བྱེད་པོ་འགའི་པོ་འགན་
པོ་གན8བྱངས་ལ་གུས་ཀྱི་ཚོགཏོག |
༨
ཚ
གནས་གཤིང།
ནས་
ཀཟླརྒྱས་པ་བརྒྱ་ཕྱག་ཅན། འཕྱུག་ཕྱིར་
མཚར་
དབང་༣ འཕ་མ།
ཀྱིས་སྐུ་
གསན་
ཞུས།
13 W༠ རྩ་ཀུན་
ས
ཁང་
བསགསེ1:ངའ།
|
་
བཙུན་མ་འཕརབ་ཀྱི་དམ་ནམ་
རྟགས།
ཤེལ་༼བ པ
བ༦%ག
ཛ དུ་ཟ་བུwས་ཀྱི་གནམ་
བྱས མཛུབགཟིག་སློག།མ་པt+
འབྲུག་གི་ཚེ་བོ་གམ་སུས་
ཅལ་འདུག།ཐབ་སར་ལམ་
གཤེནཟུར། བློན་
མགོ་ཤམ་གྱི་མ་ཡིག་
འགལམ་ས་གཞན་
ཀྱིན་འབ
ན་
་
འ་ཞིན་ཨིམs
མགོ་ཤར།
aཚུངས་པོ་མིང་དོན་རང་གི་
ན ཤིང་
ཧང་ཀུ
, བབ་
མ ས་་ཀུན་
ནར་མ་ས་གནས་གོ་
སte༠
ཐབཨི་རྒྱམ།
མགོ་ཤང་
“འབྲུག་ལྷ།གུ་གན་
འབྲལ། སྔོན། ཧལི ག་
Jཟླ་དཡིས་ཁྱོགཤོག།
| ཤུལ། སྨད་ འ། མ་པ། ཤེལ་ཁང༌།།
བྱམ། །སྲར་གཤེད། [རྒན་མིག། ཟླ་རྒྱུས་ཕྱི་ལོ་ལྔ། བློ་གླིང་དུས་ལ་༡༡
པ་ནི ། གཤམེར་སའི་བྱང་
༠ གཟུག།
1 གཞན། རྒྱལ་ལོ། ། མ་ཕྱིམ་རྟགཉྫག།
མ་ཟླས
།
ཤམས་གས་མ་བྱ།
དཀམ་
ཉ
།
ཚདབང་།བྱམ།
2ནག
རབས་མར་
དཀྲོལགསེས་ཁར།
སྲིད་ཉིད་བློན་ཀྱི ་ན་བོ།
ཧངའུ 。。
་
ཤེལ་ང་རགསྶ
གསར་དབང་།
༥
v
སྙགཟིག་
རྒྱལ་པོ།
གཟའཐག་
བ་ན།
རྣམམོ་རྒྱཕོ་བྱིན།}
་
ཕྱི
བསེ་ཚ།ནད་
། བྱ་ཁྱབ། །
༤༡ནསན་འགའགྲོས་བ
་ དོན་འགོདཨུ་རག་སོང་གཉེར་
ནང་
ནད་བདུད།
ར་བམ་
བུས་བར།གཤིམརྗེས་
བ
ཟེ་གཞནི་ཁྲི་དྲུག་སྒྲོལ་གཅེར་བུ།
འདུནཾ་ལ་མ་ནས་ཤི་ར་བ་རྒྱལ་པོ་
ཨཊྚལ་འད།
པ་སེལ།
Iལ །
ས་ཕྱིག
ནམ་
མན་
རསརས
ཐབ་
སྙིང་ཉེ་མཐུན་
འདི་རྣམས་རབས་ཆད་པ།
འབྱར་བ།
༣༠ ༡༠།
E
བགྲང།
༄༅།འདི་དག་སྡེབས་ན་བུ་མ་འབྱུང་བ། མ་
ན། འདི་རྣམས་སྡེབས་ན་ཕྱུག་བཙནའབྱུང་བ།
འདི་རྣམས་སྡེབས་ན་སྒབ་ཀྱང་ཆད།
འདི་རྣམས་སྡེབས་པ་བྱེ་བྲལ་ཡོང་བ།
འདི་རྣམས་བུ་ཚ་གསོ་བ་ངནའོ།
:
འདི་རྣམས་སྡེབས་པ་ངན་པ། ས་མཁན་རང་ཞིང་
སྤྱིར་ནང་
སྡེབས།
ཤམབ བག་མ་ག བགམ་ས་ཁགམིར་གྱི་ནམ་མཁར་
འབྲས་བུ།
བུབ་ག སྒྲུབ་པ། ཐུར་ཕཏབ་པ ཨར་བའི་ཚལ་
འདི་སྡེབས་འཐུང་དྲག་ངན་པ།
འདི་ལེབས་འཛེགས་དྲུག
ཞེས་ཞིབ། ལྷས་རིན་ཆེ་ལྷས་ངན་འཁྲི།ལྟས་ངན་ཆུར།
༣།
མང་དབུལ། ཐཚོསྐྱེན་ཅན། སྤྲུལ་འཚེ་ཁྱེམ་ ཁྱིལ་འཚོབུ་མེ་
18
2Z
སཟདས།
132
རྗེཁར་
ལ་འཐིབ་ཚུགས སོ་ནམ་སྨུག་
སྨད་
མི་བུ་སྲེལ་
གསོ་ཞུའཝས་ཕྱིར་འཐབུ་ཚོའི་མ་འགྲོག་ཡུནསོམས་དབྱེར་
SSལམ
འབྲས་བུ་ལ་གོ རྒྱུག་
a
བགམལབག་མས་བག་མ་བར བགམའི
ལ་སོ་
པར་འཇུལ་པ མགོརིའི་
བར།
ནག་ནི་པ།
»
མ
a
གཟའ་མའི་སྐྱེས
བསུང་མ་ངན་
པའི་འབྲས་བུ།
མ
་
ཉེན < གཅིག ཉེར་གཉིས་
ཉེར་བཞི
༄༅། དབང་ཐར་ཐུག་འཕྲད་འདི་རྩིས་རྙེད་མ་ལུགས་
ནས་སྲོག་གསར་མར་དབང་ཐང་གཙོ་བོར་འདོན་པ་ལ།
ཉེར་བརྒྱདཉེར་དགུ་
སམ་
ལྟས་ངན་འགྲོར་
དབནA
.
རི་
W
ཤུSཐལ
འགs
བཨཆར་
|
ཁྲམ་ཤིང་
བཙལབས་ནོར་རྙེད་སྨན་| ནོར་གོད་ཆེ་ཞིང་ཐ་མ་སྤུར།
མ་དང༌། །ཡུལ་ལྷ་བཟོང་ བཟའིམསངནིང་བུ་ཚ་
པ་གསིལ་ན་དགེ། །
དགོན་(འགྲོགས་པོས་
མི་ཤིག་གྱུར་པ་མིང།
འདྲེ་གདོན་ཕྲུགས་ཞགས་ ཁྱོ་ཤུགས་ནད་མད་རྫས་
མ་ཡིན། །རབས་ཆང་ར་ལྔས མི་ཆགས། ་བུད་མེད་མྱ་
གཧོངཤི་མང། །ཁྱི་དང་ཁ་དན་རྟག་ཏུ་ཡང་སྟེང་
སྨས་སྐྱོན་དུ་ཡོད། ། འབབ་ས་ཞིང་མི་ལ་འཚོ
ལུས་ཆང་དབང་ཐང་མཐའ་ནས་ཟད། །དགྲ་འཚོ་གྱོད་
དང་ཞེས་པ་ཡཔ། །ནད་མེད་ཅི་ཡང་འགྲུབ་བ་མེད།
Plate 7 Ms.l, ff. 31-34
Divinations concerning marriage, with the sexagenary cycle and geomantic aspects
Figures are discussed below as follows: fig. 1, Part 1; fig. 2, Part II; figs 3-4, Part III; figs 5-24, Part V



29
The Plates
ཙུང་ཐུའི་སྐྱེས་གར་པ་༢བ།
འཕཔས་
sa་མར།
AN
༥མནལ
རབས།
ཚུར་བ།
མ་༡༥
འཉུགནོ།
ལྷཆེརའན་༧
མེLཁས་
དམ་
བསལ }
ལ
།
སjལོ།།
༢༥༢༢ལ།
»
སྣ་
བུམཁན་
&མདས་ཟས་
ན་རས
ལའི་རགྲྭ་ཁྱིམ་གཞོན་
པ་བག་མའི་ལོ།
འགྲོ་བའི་ལོ།
ཞས་པ་བསམ་
ས་བ།
ཁརྫོང་བའི་ཟླ་བ།
སྤར་ཁའི་ཁྱིམ་གཞོམ་
སྐྱེས་སྤྱིར།
གཟའ།
བག་མའི་བབ་གླར་
རྫོང་ལུགས།
ཞག་རང་ཉི་མ
ཁྱིམ་གཞིམ་
འགྲོ་བའི་ཉམ་
བརག་ཁྱིམ་
འདགརགརs
ལa
འབུགས།
ཤས།
བག་མའི་
ལོ།
འཚིལ།
༡ར ༡
།
༣༡༨
༡༧
༢༢༡༧༡༤
༢༩།
ནི༢༠
༡༥་༡༤
༡༡ .
༢༠༡༥། ༡༤༡s2༧ ༢༠
ལྷ་གཟ༢ཚོ
དུག་ཁྱེར་
བ་སུ་འ་
བྱེ་བྲལ།
གཉིས་པ་བཝང་
ཞིང་བཀྲ་ཤིས་པ།
གསུམ་པ་ཐེན་བུ་
བན་ཆ་ཅན་
བཞི་པ་བག་མཛེས་
གྱོད་རྒྱག་ཝཱནྟི།
ལྔ་པ་ཕ་མ་ངག་
ལ་ངན་
Plate a Ms. 1, ft. 35-36
Divinations concerning marriage, with the sexagenary cycle and geomantic aspects
Figures are discussed below as follows: fig. 1, Part 1; fig. 2, Part II; figs 3–4, Part III; figs 5-13, Party



30
The White Beryl
པ་༢༢རལ་བུདད ར ར 5
ཡབ་གནམ་༢༩ཊཀཱ
མས@་མ།
༢
མནར
མགལ།
གསལ་ཀརིག་པ་ཡི་ཚུགཕྱི་བྲག་མར་པོ་
ལ་ཟླ་གླ་རྩ་འཉ་གདྲིན་ལ་བརྟམར}ས་ཡ་སན་པ་༧ ཞེས་པ
སྨིན་དྲུག། སྣར་མ།
མགོ: |ལག་
དུ
ནབསོ།
DO e9
DOCooo
དབོ་ཆེ་བཞི ནག་པ། ས་རི་
e
3<
༡
）
ཀྱི་ཐུན
གྲོ་ཞུན་
མུསྨར་ | ཆུ་
བཅུལུ་ ནམ་ལུ་ ཁྲུས་ཡང་ |ཁྲུལཚོང་མོན་གྲུ་ |མོན་གྲེ་
OQo[ booo
poo]Roose༠༠|
O
)
bao
ས
༧ ལོ་སར།
ལས་ལག་
མགུང་སུམགོ་འདབང་དགྲ་
ལུས་ངག་»ལུས་ངག་ [ལུས་ངགྱི་
དབང་གི་
LIH LICO
མོ
བུད་མེད།
༧མི་རིགས་
”ངགྲགཟུགས་
༧ བབས་ཡར་
ངནས་
།དགུ་མིག་
14
༢ 4
བབས་
ས་ཁ་མཆུ|རིམས་ནད་དེལ
ཞེས་པར་འབཤམས་འབབ་
མགོ་ཁྲུག རྫོའི་ལག་ལེན ནོར་ཕྱོགས
བྱེད་དགོས། ལ་གད་ལ་ཡོ་
ཡུགས་ས་ ཡུགས་ས་
སོས་
དུན་འ
འཁ་
་འབབད་
༄༅།རྟ་ཁྱུར་བཅོས་
ཚིའཁྲས་ཁུ།
ལའཛཤེས་
རྗེའབྲས་བུ།
གན་
༄༅།བརྩི་བྱའིལ།༤
བ་ཚན་ནུབ།
རར་
་་་་་
འབྲསབུ། བླཕུར་ཡའབྲག་སྔོནས་ནད་ཡམས་ནད་
9ཚཅག-
དུས་སྲེག་ལུས་བ་གྲུབ་བྱུང་།
།ཡཚནསྲོག་གི་ཕྱོགས།
༄༅།ཞང་བོ་ལུས་ཕྱོགས།
ཐམེས་གྲོགས་ཕྱོགས།
།རྗེ་དབེནཀླུང་ཕྱོགས།
ཤག་དབང་དགའ་ཕྱོགས།
༄༅
དཔ་ལས་
༄༅། ཞང་པོ་ཤར།
༈། བྱན་མེ་ནུབ།
རྗེ་དབོན་ལྷོ།
ཁོངས་མྱོང་
།ཕ་ཚན་ཤར། །
། ཞང་པོ་ཤར་བས་
བྱན་མོ་མཆོམས།
།ལྗཁེམར།
། མ་དག་
། བཚནམཚམས།
ཞང་པོ་མཚམས་
།
བྱེན་མོ་ཅང་མང་
རྗེ་རཔན་མཚམས་
དགྲམ། །
པ་ཚོན་བྱེད་
ཞིང་སོ་བྱང
བྱེན་མོ་ལྷ་
[ཐེངས་ལོ།
ཞཔཔེ་ནུབ།།
བྱེན་མོ་ཤལ་
རྗེ་དཔོན་ནུབ་
དག་ལྷོ།
།
ཁྱིམ་ནང་མི་མངས་ཀྱི་སྤར་ཁ་
རགོ་མཚམས།
བུ་ཚ། བྱན་མོ་
་
འཕུདས་ཆགསབརྩི་བ།
ཐང་ལུག
འs
༤༧༧༩
ཚནར་ མརིགས།
6
ཐོན
འཁྱེག
，
སུ་ཐུམ་གྲོལག་ར་
ན་ན
གཤེད་བཞི་རང་གི་ཐོག་བཐུན་མཚོ་བཞེར་རོ།
།
༤，
མཚམས་བཞི་བཅས་རྣས་
བཞི་ལས།
ཕྱོགས་བྲར་བབས་ན་སེ་
བཞི་འགུལ།།
ལག་གཞིས་
བབ།
ནང་གཉིས་ས་
པ་འདས་མ
སྨད་གསུམ་གྱེར་
་
།
བ་རོ་བརརའི
，
གAYS:
ནི༑
མརེལ་བར་བe
AKING
གདགས་སྲིབ་བྱ་ཁྲལ།
ཚོལོག >
ལོ་མང་།
།
པ་སྤུན་ཟངས་མར་བརྩི་བར་བྱ་
བབསོར།
གམས
WEI
་
ཟངས་མར་མ་བབསོ
དོ
སུ་ཤརཚN
， །
ལྷོ་བྱང་མདའི་བྱེ་བྲག་གནམ་སའི་བྱེ་བྲག
རྩིབ་བྱའི་ལོ། །
༤བར་ས་
མི
འི་
གི
ས་
བབས་སླར་
གནམ་ལོ་
༢
གནམ།
h?.tsie2.
，
གནམ་ལ་དང་སྤར་ཁ་དགྲ་ཐོག་བབ་པ་འཇོལ་དེབ་བམ་
ལྟ་ཟེར་ད་བེར་བརྗོད།
བླ་འཁྱམས་
།
Plate 9 Ms. I, ff. 37–41
Divinations concerning marriage, obstacle years and the impact of the hour of divination
Figures are discussed below as follows: fig. 1, Part I; fig. 2, Part V; figs 3-14, Part VI; figs 15–18, Part VII.



31
The Plates
ཟླ་8ལས་གྲུབ་པ་ཡི༌ཚན་ཕུད་པ་ཡརྱ་དེ ལྷའི་མཚན
།གྲངས་བས་ གཅིག་ ་ བ། ཉིས་
རྗེ་རིམིང་བསྟན་པ། རང་གི་ལྷ་མོ་ཁྱོས་སྦྱོར། རྒྱལ་པོའི་བསྟན་སྐྱོང་ང་ཚོའི་
པ་འགོ་བསྐོངས་གནམ་ལོ་གང་ཡིནས། པགཟུགནས་ལོ་དུ་ལོན་
བསྟན་བ། མི་ལ་ལོ་དུ་ལོན་ཐུར་དུ་ ཐུར་དུ་གྲུབ།
ཁc28 《 གླཡའཚདེ་དཔ༣། ཁྱུང་ནིཡ -'
གསུམ་པ་ལྔ་
ཀྱི་འཕྲེད་ལ་བའི་འོག་ཏུ་སོང་ སྨོནོ་བྲལནཱཧ་རིམ་༥ར། གཡི་སྦྱང་གི་གྲྭཆགིན།
མ་སྟག་ནས་ལོ་དུ་ དབང་ཐང་མཐུན་པའི་ཕྱུག་ གྲོགས་སྟག་ནས་ལོ་
ལེན་ཐུང་དུ་སྒྲུབ། ནས་ལོ་དུ་ལོན་ཐུང་ལ་སྤྲུག དུ་ལོན་ཐུར་ལ་གྲུབ།
པ་ཞག་རྒྱལ་མཚན་དཔལ ༥༨ དེ།པོ་ལུབ་༢པ།
དྲུབ། བདུན་ བརྒྱད་།
ལརཀྱི་དགཆན་ལམ་ལག འཕྲིན་པོམ་ཁྲིདིམ་ཁྲིད། ༢ཡག་གིས་གྱི་ཤིང་ཚང་མ་ཆུང་
དགྲ་ཡོས་ནས་ལོ་དུ་ གྲོགས་མེས་ནས་ལོ་ འཕྱི་བྱ་བ་གཅིག་པའི་ཡོནན་
ལེན་གྱེན་ལ་འགྲན། དུ་ལོན་ཐུབལ་སྤྲུལ་དེ་དང༌ མེ་དུ་ལོན་ཐུང་ལ་སྤྲུག།
གདལ་ཐམསམ ཡསྤྱི་ཕན་ནདིམ་ཚད། དཔྱང་ཐག་གྲོལ་མ་གྲོལ་
མ་ཡོམས་ལོ་ད་ གནི་ལེ་ཨར་གྱི་ཉིན་ བཞི་ལོན་མར་གྱི་ཉི་
ལོན་ཐུར་ལ་སྒྲུབ། མར་གྱི་དུལོན་ཐུང་ལ་སྤྲུབ་ནས་ཡང་དུ་ལོན་གྱིན་ལ་
འགྲོའི་ཕྱིར སས་བློས་ཞིབ། པོ ༢༢ |འདམགོa འཕྱིས་
བས་ བ ཅུ་གསུམ་ པ ཅུ་པའི་
བ་༣༦ལཕྱུང་ལ་མ་ལབ། སྐར་མའི་ཁྱི་ཞིག་མ་ཞིག།ར་རིས་ཤིག་མི་འོག།
བུ་སྟགནས་ལོ་དུ་ལོན། མ་སྤྲེལ་ནས་ལེ་དུ་ གན་པེ་
ཐུར་ལམྱབ། ཁོན་རྐྱེན་ལ་འགྲས། ལེ་དུ་ལེན་ཐུར་ལ་བགྲད།
འདེམས་གར་དབང་ཕུག་དཔལ། རིག་འཛིན་གཞན་ཤུལ་
པ ཨེལྔ་། བཅུ་དྲུག། ། བཅུ་པདུན། །
རྟེན་ཀུན་རན་མངོན་གནང་ཟིན་པ་
ད་འགས་གགནརལ་ཀའི་སྟེགས།
འགayMw
གནམ་ལོ་ནས་ བྱས་པའི་གྱི་ལུས]བརྩི་བྱའི་སྲོག་ལུས་
མར་ག་ནས་
།གྱེན་ལ་བགྲངས།
ཐརགང་གིས་གསར་བ་དང་
ལོའགནདབzALབན་ལ༢ཡིག་ས།
ལྟར་སྤྱི་བོར་ ར བཛཀུད་ནི་བུ་འཐེན་
སྲོག གནམ་ལོའི་སྲོག་ གནཾ་ལོ་སོ་གི་མི་བུ་
༧ སེག་
ལ སོག་
༧ སྲེག་
༧ སྲེག་
༧ སྲོག་
བྱ་སྲེག་ཐཤིང༌། ༧ སྲེག་
༧ སྲོག་
༧ སེག་
༧ སྲོག་་
སུག་སྟེ་
༧ སེག་
༧ སེག་
༧ སྲེག་
༧ སོག་
གནམ་སའི་གནམ་ལོ༢
ཀྱི་སྐྱེ་བ། ལུས་ཀྱི་སྨེ་བ།
བྱ་ལུས་ཀྱི་ཐངཤིང ༧ ལུས་
ལུས།
༧ ལུས་
༧ ལུས་ལ ལུས་
༧ ལུས་
༧ ལས་
༧ ལས་
ལས་
༧
ལུས་
༧ལས་
ས་
༧ ལུས་༧
དབད་ཐར་
”དབང་ཐང་
ལདབང་ཐང་
ལ དབང་ཐང ༤དབང་ཐང་
༤དབང་ཐང་
གནམ་ལོའི་དབང་| གནམ་ལོའི་དབང་
ཐང་གི་སྙེ་བ། ། ཐང་ག་སྨྲ་བ་
འདབང་ཐང་
-དབང་ཐང
དབང་ཐང
བྱ།དབང་ཤང་གི་ཐཔ་པདབང་ཐང
”དབང་ཐང
༧དབང་ཐང་
”དབང་ཐང་
ལདབང་ཐང་
༧དབང་ཐང་
ཀུང ཀློང་
ཁྲལ་དང་བོ་སྐྱེས་པ་ཕོའི་ས་
༄༅ཀུང་འི་ཐགྲང་
བྱ་ཕོས་མེ་ས་བུའིས།
བྱ་བཏང་ཁོང་
༄༅།ལྔ་ཁྲལ་གཉིས་པ་ཁུང་མེད་ཁྱིམ་
གྱི་ས་ །
ལྔ་འམ་
།་
་
གསུམ་པ་བྱིས་པ་གཞན་གྱི་ས་
།
1:4
སྟབྱམS
O
རབ་
©
O_༩)
s
° ༠༠༠
དྲག་ཀ་
རགར་ན
མ་རྒྱལ།
༠ ༠
oo 90
༠
༠
Sབs<
༠༠ ༠ o
b༠ ༠ ༠
JO OOO
ས་སྐལ།e༠༠ ༠
I༠ ༠༠
O
དཀར་ན།
OOO
O ©
5O
༠༠ ༠
༠༠༠ ༠༠༠༠
OO |
་
ཤOOOCe@e
booooood
མ་གལ་
@ooo cool
དྲུག་ག
oa
ག་
དྲ
DO
©©།
ན་
ནག་ན
གལ་
。
©O
T ནགན་
གལ།
ལ་
ཁང་ས།.
དུས་རྒོད་སྲོག་ལུས
དབང་ཀླུང་
འགོའི
ཞིང་ས།
དུར་ས།
མིང།
ཚོ
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་བརྟག་
722/
ཕོ་མཆེར་ལྕི་འཐབ་ཤ་ནད་རྨབ་ཕོལ་འགྲེས་ས་
འགགས་ཆུ་ནད་ཆམ་པ་ལག་གཡོན་ཐུག་ཟེར་བར་
སྙིང་དང་རྒྱུ་མ་ཁྲག་འཁྲུགས་ལྕེ་རོ་སྟོད་སྐྱེད་
མཇིང་ཚབ་རིམས་ནད།
གློ་ནད་སྐྲན་རུམ་ནར་རྣ་བས་ནང་གློ་ཚར་ན།
ཚུནང་རྗེལནད་མཁལ་སྟེང་གྲང་བ་སྲསམོ་རྐང་ཚུས་
རྣ་ལན།
པརྣམེཔ།།
ནོད་བརྟག་པ། རླུང་འདི་རྩེ་རྒྱས་ཕོ་མཆིན་མིག་
རྩིབ་གཡས་ནད་
ལན་རྐྱེན་གྱི་མི་ ར་རམ་ནུབ་ནས་གཉེན་མགར་
ཟས་འཇུག་སབ་ཞད་པ་ཤང་བཟོའི་ལག་ནས་
པོ་ཚོར་རྩིབ་གཡས་ཟན་སྦྱིས་
འཆར་ཟིས།
གདོན་བརྟག་པ། ཐེའུ་བྲང་དམ་སྲི་ཀླུ་རྣམས་ཤིང་
ཕྱིར་འབྲང་ཕྱོགས་ཤར་ནས།
ལྷོའམ་བྱར་ནས་གཉེན་སྲིང་མོ་ཡུགས་མོ་ཚོ་
སུག་བྲ་ལག་ནས་གཉའ་བ་དལ་ཤ་ཆང་བསིར་ཟོས།
ལྷོ་དང་ནུབ་ནས་གཉེན་ཞུང་པོ་བུ་ཚ་བུ་སུ་
མཁན་མགར་རམེ་པོའི་སྐྱོ་མ་འམེ་མགོན་སྟོད་་་་
སྙིབ་བཡིན་ཤ་མར་དཀར་ཡང་ན་མགར་བའི་གསོལ
མོལ་ཕྱིན་
ཤར་རི་ལྷོ་ནུབ་ཀྱི་གཉེན་རྒན་མོ་བུཚ་བནཱ་མགྲོན་ལག་
འཁུར་བ་གྲ་ཤ་མཁར་ལས་རྒན་མོ་བསྟན།
ས་བདག་དགེ་བསྙེན་དམ་འགོར་ལྷོ་ནུབ་ཤར་ཕྱོགས་
ནས་དུད་འགྲོ་སེར་སོགས་སེར་ཆགས་ཕྱིར་འབར།
གཉོན་བྱང་ཕྱོགས་ཡུགསམ་བུདམེད་ནོག་
མོ་ཕ་ཁྱིམ་དེ་འདྲའི་ལག་ནས་ཟས་ཟོས།།
བཙན་རམུ་བྲག་བསེན་བོཟངས་རྟ་ངམར་
ཆགས་ཕྱིར་འབྲངས།
དབJ5
ལས་འ<ས་
ཆ5ལྷགས་
བའར་པའི
ནམས་བསྟན་
བདུད་ངམ་དམ་སྦེ་བྱུར་འདྲེ་བྱང་གི་ཕྱིར་སླེ་སྡེ་
ཡུགས་སའི་ནོར་ཟས་ཕྱིར་འབྲངས།
བདུད་དམ་རྒྱལ་པོ་གནོད། །
*
#
ཟན་དྲནསྲོག་བ་ཚོསྟོད་ཤརྒྱུ་མ་སྙེད་ཟངས་
སེར་སོགས་དམར་སོང་ཆ་ང་ཚསྐྱལཔོ་བཏུངས།
ཟན་སྦྲས་སྦག་སྒོག་ཆུ་འཁུར་བ་གཟུག་ཤ་བསྲེགས
ཤ་སྐམ་ཤ་ས་སྣོད་རགཾ་སེར་པོ་རྫ་སྣོད་ཟེས།
གར་གསུམ་སྦྲུམ་མ་དང་ལྕོགས་སྡེར་མཁར་
དར་ཞོ་ཟློས།
ལྷང་ཅན་སྨད་ཤམོ་ཤ་མཁལ་མ་ནག་
སྣོད་ཟེས་ཆར་བསིང་དྲི་མེད་བཏུངས།
བཅའདབར་
བགsgམ།
རབདུད
a
ཟས་བརྟག་པ། ཟས་སྦས་སམ་གཡོས་མ་སཱ་
ཚོད་ཤ་ཚོ་ཤིང་སོད་ཅཅུག་པ་
ཟོས་རྩིབ་གཡས་ཤ་མཆིམ་སྒྲ་ཐོས།
སྐྱ་བཏོག་པ།
འཕུར་པ་
མགོ་རེག།
རལ་ཅན་དང་།
གསལ་མ།
pcoop©
མས
བ བྱསློག
བསྐྱེད་པའ༨
ས་དབང་
ཤ་ཚན་བརྟག་པ
མཆན་ཁུང་སེ་བ།
དགུར་པོ།
སྨོན་པ་འམ་སྙེད་
ལྔ་བ་ཅན་དྲུག་
གོ་རེ་ག
ཀླུང་རྟའི་དར་
སྒོ་ཁྱི་འོག་རྟ་ར་
ཉམ་མཚོས་
དགས་
ཁྱིམ་ས།།
ནར་
དབང་ནོད།
ཟས་གོས།
བློ་བརྟན།
| ལྷའསུངས།
ནར་
པའི་ཁོངས་
རབ་གཉིས་
དར་འཕུར་བའི
ཞེ་སའི་
གཉིས་འོང་།
འཕྲད་པས།
དུས།
ས་དབང་ཀླུང་
དར་
བཙིར་བ་དང་
དུས་སྤེག་
ཚུནང་འཕྲད་
ཀྱི་ཁར་ས
བ་གླང་
གྱི་ཞིང་ས་
དུར་ས།
བ་བྱ་དང་
དུས་སློག་
ལྕགནང་
འཕྲོད་ཅིག
ས་རབདs
ལྕགསུར
ས་དུར་ས།
ཀཅུག་
དང་དུས་བྲག་
སའང་འཕུར་
བ༦བར་ཆུ་
ནདའཐུང་
འ༨༢༨ཉིད་མ
ནུས་ཚོད།
མཐུན་ལ་མ་
གཏད་ཡོད།
Plate10 Ms. 1, f. 42-47
Divinations of ill-health and the impact of the hour of divination
Figures are discussed below as follows: fig. 1, Part 1; figs 2–3, Part VIII; figs 4-6, Part VII.



32
The White Beryl
ཁ་ཉག་པq་ན་ར་ལགཙུས་སུ། བབད་ན་པའི་nཏུག་པོ་ཉིད་མལུང ། །
དུ
མ་དོན་ཀུན་རྟགའི་ཞུབསུ།དབy༢སྟེན་པ༦༨༧༡1ས་ཚོ་༢༥པ་
ཐད་བྱ༢ལ།ཆོསར《ཚུང་ལ། སྐy3ཎངqང་དཔསིའི་1281
ལོ་བཅུ་གཉིས།
སོ་སོའི་བཞི་གཤེད།
སོ་སོའི་བདུན་ཟུར།
པ་ལྷོའི་ཕཚན་ལ་དབང་
གྲོགས་ལོ་རེ་གཉིས་བྱད་བ།
ན་
དོན་པའི་འབྲས་བུ།
སྨྱོས་སྒོ་མང་ཚོགས་
༡ བར 1
སྐྱོན་འབྲས།
LII
རས་ལྔའི་གཟུགས། །
འཆད་ཆེན། འཆར་ཆུང།
དབང་ལོ་ཚ དབར་ལ་ཆུང མ་ལོ་ཆ། མ་ལོ་ཆུ་ བུ་ལེ་ཆེ།
བུ་ལོ་ཆུང༌། གྲོག་ལོཚེ་གྲོགོ་ལཆ་ནརགྲ་ལེཆེ་དགྲ་ལོ་ཆུ་
སེག་ནག་པ།།
རར་བ་
སྲོག་འབྲས།
སྲོག་
འབྲས།
ལུས་ནག་པ།
རཀར་བ་
ལུས་
ལས་འབྲས
དབུད་ཐདནག་པ།
དབང་བཅུ་
དབང་འབྲས་
དབང་
འབྲས་
ཀླུང་རྟ་ནག་པ།
ཀློང་འབྲས་
ཚུར་
འབྲས།
རྗེལ་བཞི་ནག་པ།
ལེ་ལན་འབྲས་བུ།
རྡེལ་བཞི་དཀར་བ།
ལེ་ལམ་འབྲས་བུ་
འབྱུང་ངགྲ་ནང།
ལེ་ལན་འབྲས་བུ།
ཤི་བའི་ལོ་ཟླ་ཞག་དུས།
བདུད་བཅད་ཟླ་བ།
ལན་རྐྱེན་འབྲས་བུ།
Plated Ms. 1, ff. 48-50
Divinations of death
Figures are discussed below as folloWS: fig.1, Part |; figs2-10, Part ]X



33
The Plates
|
་།
མ
|
་༣༥
འ་ངལང་གི་2 །སྐུ་པ།མར་ག8)ཤོ་༢༣་༩༢་ཚེ་
།
ཨ་ :༥་གཙུགཙ༣ ཕྱིའཐ་ན་།
གཤེན་གྱི་བ་སླར་
ཁྱེར་འདྲེ།
༤༢ །
༠༢༣ །
སླར་ཁའི་གཟུག།
ལ་ །
འབྲས་སུ་
མི་རིགས།
འཇུར་ཐང།
མི་རིགས།
འདུར་ཐང།
བབས་
སྐྱེ་གནས་
8
ཕྱི་མ
དར་གུད།
སྐྱེ་གནས་
མིར་བཙུགརྒྱལ་ཤིང་ཉིན་ཐུབ། བསང་ཉིད་བྲལ་བ་
ཅན།
རིགས་དྲུགནས་འདྲེན་
སྒོམ་ཉིད་ཚོགས་འདུར།
གར་ཆོས་སྨོན་ལཾ་འདུན།
མགོ་བན་སྔཌ་པར་འབུལ་བ། རམང་མང་མེད་གཏོད།
ལམ་འཕྲེང་བཟོ་བ།
སོང་པོས་རྒྱ་གར་གཏོར་བ
བཅུས།
མི་འཉིས ལྷ་ཁང་མཆོད་རྟེན་མཚིག དགེ་འདུན་འཁྲུལ་བ།
འདྲར་ཚུག
འརྩིས།
མིང་
། བཀྲ་
མཚན་
ཡུལ་ལྷ་
མ་སྨན་ | རོ་གོག་
སྦེ་ཤལ་
བཟེད་
བས་ཆར ཤིས་ངན | རམེ་རོ་ཤ་ཡ་
རོ་རིགས།
དུར་ལྔའི་གཟུགས།
གཉེན་པོའི་ལ།
དྲོས་དབང་ཁམས་
སྤར་སྨོ་
གཟའ་སྐར།
ཤི་ཟླ་ཕབུ་ཚ་བོའི་ལོ་རྟ[
༡༠
༡༦༡
༩ ༢༠
༡༢
1:|:ནད་རིགས།
མཛངམུ་ཆུ་གྲུམ་བུ་སྐྲུན།
ལྷོག།འབྲས།གཟའ།གཡན་
༢ བད་ནད། དྲག། མེ།
གྲང་བ། ཐིབས་གྱི་གྲུར་
ག་ད གྲོ། སུབསུ།
བལྕགས་རིགས། །
མཆིན་ནད། ལོང་བ།
། མཛེ། གག་ལྕི། གྲུམ
ཐུར དམིབན་བོན།
རྡོད་གཏོར། 41
སྙིང་ནད་ཚ་བ་ཆེས་ཆོག འགགས་གྱི་ མར་ནད་
གླུ་གློ། མཁའ་ནད། དམུ་ཆུ་རྦབ་བྱས་བསད།དོར་བསྒྱུར།
ཞུ་གྲྭ་སྟོག་པ་བརྒྱ་སཱིg སྙོག།བོར།རྐྱང་རྐྱེན་སྤྱིར་
བོཀ་མགྲུ་ཡུག་དབྱི་ཕག་རྒྱལ། བཀྲ་སེའུ།
བབས་སྤར།
རིས
Platej2Ms. 1, f. 51-53
Divinations of death
Figures are discussed below as follows: fig. 1, Part 1; figs 2–13, Part IX



34
The White Beryl
*
***
*༩ཀུཙོ
ང(ར
།
ིང་ པི་པུ རྒྱུ་དད་དུ། །
་མངའ་བདག་རྒྱལ་པོའི་སྤུའ| ཆབ་སྲིར་བློན་པོའི་སྡུར།
(༡༩༣/། གལ་དངོས༑ དE:ཀ་ངའང་ཏུན་ངགའུ་ 182
མཁས་བཙུན་པཎྜི་ཏའི་སྤུར། ཉན་ཐོས་བཙུན་པའི་སླར།
འོད་ | ཨ་རྔt༧༣༣ པཚེ''༡ས་ཀྱི༌ ལྟཙནངོན་
མཁན་ཟབཤརརྐོས་མཁན་ཤིང་བཟོའི་གོས་བཟོ་ཉལ་བའི་
སྔགས་པ་མཐུ་ཆེན་སྲུར། །གཤེན་རབ་བོན་གྱི་སྤུར།
ཨེ་མཁྱེན་རྗེས་འཚོ་བྱེད་སྨན་པའི་སྤུན་ལྷ་བཟོ་བྲིས་ལུགས་
མཁན་སླར།
གཤིན་པོའི་ལོ།
ཁབས་ར། །
པས། །
9g་ལོ་རྣ་འདི་རྣམས་
ས ས སར་ཁ་འདི་རྣམས་ལ་ ་
གི་ན་བདུད་ཀྱི་
ཁོག་པ་འགྲམས།།
ཀྱི་འདེམ་ བླབ་ཁས་པ་
ར་འཐམས
up
gi ལེ་མོ་མ་
སར་ལ་ཐེག་འདས་ན།
་ ་ ་ དགུ་མིག་གི་གྲངས་། །
། །
རད
ཟླ་
ཚེས་གྲངས།
༄༅། ཟླ་བ་འདི་རྣམས་ཀྱི་ཚེས་འདིར་ཤི་
ལོ་འདི་དག་ལོ་ཟླ་ཞག་དུས་འདི་ཐོག་ཤ།
སྲོག་ལུས་དབང་ཀླུང་ །
བླའི་ཁམས་
ཞི་བའི་ལ་སྒྲ་ཞག་དུས་ཀྱི་
ནནི་དུར་གྱི་ ལེ་ཆེ།
1:
ན་ནུར་འགྲམས།
་སྲོག་ལུས་དབང་
ཀླུང་བླ་རང་མ་བུ་དགྲ་གྲོགས་ཀྱི་ན་ཤི་དུར་གྱི་
། །
འགྲམས་སྐྱེ་གབ་རྩེ།།
ཉི
སྦྱར་ཁ་འདི་ཐོག་ཤི།
༠།
འགསར
ཀྲང་ཀུང་རྗེས་ངན།
ཀྲུང་གུང་རྗེས་འགྲམས།
ཀུང་ཀུང་དུར་ལེན།
ཀུང་ཀུང་དུན་ལག།
eཤིན་པོ་ལེ་ཆུ་ཤི་བའི་གནམ་ལོ་ ལོག་མེན་འདིར་
ཕྱིན་ན་ལེ་ངན་ལྕགས་བཞི་མེ་བརྒྱད་འགྲེམས།
རུས་ཁམས།
།
ཁ| =། །
༧༡s
ས་སs
དགྲ་གཟའ་དག་སྐར།
འཁ་སར།
བྱང་སྐར།
ཤར་སྐར།
སྐར་མགོ་བཞི་ཟློས།
སྤར་ཁ་འདི་དག་ལ་ཤི་ན་ཟློས། དོ་གཅིག་མ་གླངས་
ལོ་ཟླ་ཞག་དུས་འདོམས་པ་ཟློས། །
སླེ་བ་འདིར་ཤི་ན་ཟློས།
གཤིན་གྱི་ལ།
ཏུ
2
ཤ་མག་གསོན་
ལ་བལྟ་ལགས།
གཤིན་རྒྱ་ལ།
ནི་མིག་གསོན་
ལ་བལྟ་ལུགས།
24e
གཤིན་གྱི་ལོ།
A)
ཤི་མིག་གསོན་
ལ་བལྟ་ལགས།
གཤིན་གྱི་ལ།
IL:II/1
ཤི་མིག་གམོ་ན་
ལ་བལྟ་ལུགས།
༈
ནི་གསོན་སྤར་སྨེ་གརན་ས་
་གཅིག་པར་བལྟ།
Plate13 Ms. |, f. 54-58
Divinations of death
Figures are discussed below as follows: fig. 1, Part 1; figs 2–16, Part IX



35
The Plates
LETTER
9
O
za
lifi
Plate 14 Ms. I, ff. 1-2
The thirty Chinese and Tibetan computational charts
Plate 15 Ms. 1, f.59
The thirteen charts of Bal-mo lding-skor
Figures are discussed below as follows: figs 1–30, Part X
Figures are discussed below as follows: figs 1-13, Part XI



36
The White Beryl
ཚ༌
དུ་སེཞི་དང་ལུགས
ར་བསེ་རིན་ཆེན་གཉེན<ཁཛོད་ལུགས་
ཕྲུག་དང་སྤྲུགས་པའི་ཞུན་
1|ཀ ] [
E
༨༦oa
[ ID |
|
|
| |
|
ས་
ལགབ་
ར་རུ་
བསེ་རུ་
༢
ས་ཁ་
3
སོ་
L1༥
ར་རུ་
མ་ར་
ན་འ་
J་ཞུ།
नया
གྱིད་
3བང་འg
:རབསེ་རིན་ཆེན་ཀུན་ལུསལུགས་་
བསེ་རུ་
5
ལས་ས་
ཀླུང་རྟ་དགྲྭ་ད༨ | རླུང་རྟ་སྤྱན་
ཆུང་རྡ་སར་འཁྱི་
ར་རུ་
E -L-IL|
JUT COLDED LOL]
ཡར་ཁས
[ ] [ ༡
།
སྤྱིར་ཁམི
ཡར་ཁ
སེ་རུ་
ཕྱི་
བས་
ndonar
ན་་་
རང་བཞཆད་
བསདཤིས་སྒྲུབ
33(བབ་
ཉིན་བལ་
ད་ཅུས་སའི་
གསtཆ་
dig
དོན་བར་ bན་
སྐབས་ ཚས་སུ་
གསང་བ་ཡང་རིག་མར་ཐ་མའི་བུ་བདུན།
དུས ལྟོས་(༥༦དྲིན་
ཙམ་
ན་
ག་བ་དར་
ཀྱི་གནས་ཁར་ན་
དམག་
ས་ར་
d5ལ་
༥
ན་ཐག་ནས་ཚུབའི་རྒྱུ་རིགས་
པ་འཕྱང་བའི་སེ་རིགས་མ་
འ ཡོ་བ་ཚེཤ་༧བས།
འབྱw
505
++
བ
ས་
ས
ནན་
སངས་
མ(བཞི་དཀར(ས༩
དུའངནག་ཕྱི་
ག་ས་ག་
ཤིས་ཀ
ཤ་བཞེ་དཀར་ཁ་
ཁྱབཞིjn@གོReཝ
ནག་ དཀར་
འོ་བཞི་
ཐོགིན་
ཆགྱི་
ཙན<རོ་
ན
ཊག་གྱི་
ནར་
རྣའ
@ད་
།རོ་
11
Ny
Plate 16 Ms. II, ff. 1-5
Supplementary divinations of natal horoscope
Figures are discussed below as follows: fig. 1, Part II; figs 2-11, Part IV



37
The Plates
ང
cy
-
-།
།
།
རུས་ཁམས་བ་ཚེམས།
ཤུས་ཁམས་༥ན་
ནས་
།
1962
།
།
འབང་བཞི་དཔལ་
ཀྱི་སྐབས་
བaང་བཞི་-
སྒྲོག་བཞིས་
ཁ1
།
E2E8E
དག
]
། །
|
།
(ན་བཞི་ནད་གཅོད་ཞེབས་
ལུས་ཆ་སྟོབས་
(ན་ས
སྲི(ལྟ(སྟོབས་
，
TIE7
[1
1]
]
E
L7
[
། །
།
།
རྣཤ་བཛན་ལ་ནདས་ནས་
༥༠
དབང་ང་ཚོས་ཁྱོར་
གཅིག་དུར་བཞི་སྡེབས་ངན་
མརgདན་སྟེགས་ནས་
ཐོ(ཁོངེགཅིགས་ལ་ངsཁྱགས་བཞིན་
འབར་མའི་བར་
གོ
༠།
， །
མན་ཙད
ན་
उपवान्त्वना
སོང་ར་ ཡིན་
༣་ནང་ཁྲི་ [ཁན་ནང་ནས་
， །
་
Cours
།
གཙུག་ལག་མི་འགྱུར་བ་བཞི་ངན་
གང་
ཕྱ་ལྡེབས་ནས་
བྱེད་པ་ཡང་
ཁྱོའ་མོ་སྤར་
བྱད་མ་ཕྱིར་
ལཔོ་ བ་ཡོa
[
ས་
ཆ ，
༠
E] 2 ] LI D ED
E DE [] ]
།
།
ན་ནན་
dista
ལ་ཚན་ལསྐྱེ་
ཚེས་ཟིན་ཐོ༥་བྱ་གི་
དགིན་གསུམ་ གུq་ཚོས་ག9 གིསཞཡོ་
མོ་གཉིས་
aston
དུ་ཁ་བ་ཕྱི་དང་ སླ
།
བ་ཁེན་ཕྱགཉིས་
02 g (Giait
9ཛམ་གཞིས།
ངས་ནས་
III L
། །
[
[༥][
།
1
།
།
འཆམ་རས་ཀྱི་
ན
འགྲོ་ཡོད་སྲིད་དུ་
།
འགྱི་ལོ་ཕྱི་
གྲོ་མོ་འབྲི་་
བག་སོ།
༡༥
།
༢༧
།
།
།
མ་་༠
ཐོག་ངས་སཞི་ས་
STATOK
，
aན་ཁྱངས་བྱ་མོ་ཁྱུང་
Todo
2
ར་འཛིན་
ད ང་བར་
jཕྱང་ད་
t
ག་ར་
བས་སྤྱི་
ཕྱི་ཐུམ་གྱིས་
།
རི
རབ་
།
ག་
།
ཉིན་ཡ
ད་
ན
ས་བདས་
dicandroid
།
ར་དུག་
Aཚན་
ཞིར་གྱི་རིན་
ཚེག་ཅནུམདང མི་
།
།
མས།
བ
ར་བྱས། ཞི་བ།རྒྱསྦྱརgབ་མ་
1:|:
ཀྱི་
ན་ན
།
ཚམིག་གདལ་ སྐྱེད་པའི་ཆཀྱང་
སག་གདན་
«གཡ།མ་
ཞརགས་
བབས་
།
ལྷུག་རྗེ(སརྣལ་
Joiasso1354
ཆེད་ས་མཁར་
བ$གས་
ཁན་ཁྲུས་ལགས་ ། སྟོད་སྨདང་བཞི་ཚུཌ་
སgད་རན་
Plate17Ms. II, f. 6-10
Supplementary divinations concerning marriage and obstacle years
Figures are discussed below as follows: fig. 1. Part II; figs 2-12, Part V; figs 13-19, Part VI



38
The White Beryl
དན་ཏུ་རྩུབ་
ཙགཚད་
གྱི«ད་མི་
་་་
བྱར་ཞྭ་གྱོན་
་་སྤུངས་ཁྲི་སྣང་
།
མ་མདའ་
བར
ར་
5
བསྐྱེད་
g
90
་
ག་ས་
L1
།
L་ནང་
སྐྱེ་བ་སྤྱིའི་ཁ་དམར་འབྲས་བུ།
༡༨
ན་
་བ་
༄༅།
©OOOD
།
གཡུ་ཐོག་
༧ ༩
།
།
བཞི
།
།
གནམ་ལོའི་སྨོརཁབས་
ཀྱིས་ཆེར་བབ་
།
TÂMát gan
རྙིང་ཚི་དགྲབབས་
མཛཞིབཞག་གྱིན་འགཅ
།
ནམ
།
1:|: ཕྱི་གནམ་སྐས་
s
མའི་གཞི་ཚུལ་ན་
Taar
གཞི་ནོ་
གཞལ་སྒ་བྱིས་
། །
Plate13 Ms. II,ff. 11-15
Supplementary divinations concerning obstacle years
Figures are discussed below as follows: fig. 1, Part II; figs 2–10, Part VI



39
The Plates
དུར་མིག་གི་སྐོར་འབོ་(
པས་ར་
ཡར་ཁའི་འཚ་དུལ་བ་མི་ས་
དབྱུ་ར་
3(ཡར་ལ་
)
བའི་་མི་རུས་ཀྱི་
ལྐོག་ཕྲན་བཞི་པོ་སོ་སོའི་གཉིཔ་ཞག་གཟའ་
ཚ་ཛོ་རོངོམ་ངུས་རང་ཀེག་དུནཟུར་མཐུན་
སྤྱད་་ཆོད་བྲུ་འཕྱིས་
ལོ་གྱིས་འཆི་དུསཏཅིས་
གཕྱི་བཞི་གཤེད་སྟབདུན་དར་ཡོག་མན་
དགྱི་ཡིགང་རཚརིག་ལོ་རྒྱུ་ཤ་རུས་ཀྱི་འོག་
རྟེལ་དཀར་ཡངགོ་འབྱས་བྱ་
རྗེལ་ཞག་མང་གོ་་ཁྲས་
མར་ཚང་མནyས་
བ
།
ཡ
སྨིབའི་ལེ་ལན་ངས་འཛིན་
སྐྱེས་
༢༨
ཉི་མའི་ཁྱེར་ཕྱེ་སྲོག་བཅད་ཀྱི་སོ་ཡན་
ན་ན་
ཡ་མ་ད་གཟི་བར་ན་
ན་ཟླ་བ་
སྐྱོ་གནང་གཅོད་འབྲཕུ་
གན་༣
་་་
སྐྱེ་གཉིས་པ་རང་གཅོད་རྡེལ་དཀར་
ན
་ནག་
སྐྱེ་གནས་གར་( ཚོདsཁ་ལོང་
།
༥ཚ
སྐྱེ་གནས་
གསུམི་ས།
//
Plate19 Ms. II, f. 16-18
Supplementary divinations concerning obstacle years and death
Figures are discussed below as follows: fig. 1, Part II; fig. 2, Part VI; figs 3–10, Part IX



40
The White Beryl
ཞུགས་ནར་ཐབས་སཀྱི་གནས
ན་
ངས་
ནམ། བམ
Csat
རབ་ཙུ་ ཐམ་
དia
ཆད་ཀྱི་འདས་ནངོཇུག་
ཚེགཉིས་ཀྱི་
ཙུག་
Ja
རུསཆོསྐྱེ་གནས་
ནི་སནུག།
རྡེལ་རྩའི་མིང་
ཀྱི་གནས་དྲུག་ཅུའི་ན་མདའ་མི་ཁྱལ་ཞིང་སྒྲ་མ་ཡི
འབྱསཞས་པ་ཉཀྱི་སྤྱོད་རྒྱུའི་བར་མདའ་གྲམ་ཤི་
2aཔ་ཁོལ་
གྱིས་ས་ས་ལམgaཕར་
ཨན་ཛ་%་ཞིཤར་གྱི་དུས་སག་
འབྱཔཁྱབཟང་ཞུ་
རབཟངམང་
གསར་མཚན་གན
ཙ་ཅང་བཟང་ཝ་
འབatཀྱི་
ཆུ
ར་ཡaང་བ་
ར་ལྔ་
གཞི་བདཞིན་ལ་
ܙܘܘܗ
༡། རུ་
E
པ་རྩིས་དུས་ཚོདཝཅུ་གཉིས་ཀྱི་འབྲས་བུ་
ནལ་ལས་
ཉིནུས་
སྔོན་འཁོར་
ནམ་ཕྱེད
བྱེད་རེངས་
9་རས་
Plate20 Ms. II, f. 19-24
Supplementary divinations of death and the impact of the hour of divination
Figures are discussed below as follows: fig. 1, Part II; figs 2-5, Part IX; fig. 6, Part VII



41
The Plates
ད་པར་བ ས་བྱ་
རྣལྷའཕྱང་བལྟ་
ཡུབ་བམ་བྱང་བལྟ་
#ཕྱི་ཤུམ་བསྡུ་
འོ་ནཱི ཁན་བྱང་བར་
ནོར་རི་ཁྱད་མལྟ་ནི་ཤར་རིའི་ལྟོ་བར་
མིབས་རྩིས་བྱས་
ཤ་མཚན་ཅི་ཡང་
are
a
འa
མཐང་གི་གདན་རབས་ནན་
རིན་
མཉེ་
མཁ་དག་
ས་
ཚད་བ།
plསམ་ ནt.
མཚནཙཛད་ཡོད་
སྐྱས་དབང་ཁྱད་ དམངས་ཨུཔ་ཁྱུ་
ར་དང་ག་ས་ཚུན་
ཙམ་་གཞི་ ཁོར་ཆེད་ཡང་ན་
dotcourant your
ལུཔདཝང་དུར་
ཁ་འཕྲད།
མ་
རང་མགྲོནཡ་དགྲོན་
ཁ་པས་སད་
སང་གཕྱི་མར་
བཞི་ས་བྱ་
བྱུང་བའི་རྗེ་མོ།
རབས་ཆད་
བར་་
་ས་ཡཕྱི་ཡང་ཕྱི་
ར་གནོདཡུགས་ཕག་
མ་ཕགི་ཚུརཚཅོr
ཡོག་བར་གཅོད་
བཅད་ཁ་
དབྱས་བྱུང་གི་མཚོ་ནི་མས་
འགྲུས་མ་འགས་
ཉས། སང་ བྱུང་དང་ས་བདག་
ང་པ་ཁང་ཞིང་ར་གསུ་
མནབག
ཐར་བཅད་མངགས་
ཚུར་བརྩདའཤས་/
གཡས་དགྲའི་མཚན་མས།
དཔ་ལྷ་སས་
མ་མེད་
ཉེས་ས་ཡ་མིས་ཡང་ བ་
p »5ipདབ»»
fjལsi%58)
ཨར་གཏོད་མ་བྱུང་ /
ཡོད་
གླིང་ཤར་
ལཨར་ལྷ་སངས་
གཉིད་འདྲེ་ཡོད་
བཏང་ནས་
| བཅད་མི་འཆོར་
བར་བཆས་འཆོར་ཚུར་
ལུས་་འགྲོར་མི་ བ་ཡོརོ་
ཟས་སྤུན་གཔོ་གཔརr
གཞན་མ་
བྱབ་མེའི་མཚན་མ་
ལྷ་ལྡེ་མེད་
༥
ཁྱེད་
མིང་ཡང་ཡང་
ཚ\བྲལ་བྱེད་བྱེད་མ་
བ@aa17b989)\
ཕྱིར་གཅོད་མ་
ཕྱིར་བསྐྱེད་ཚུགས་
ཀྱིས་མནོ་ཚུཊམ་གྱི་
ཡང༌གཅི་དབུ་ལྔ་།
༡106jpདsts
65653 za)༠
དཀ
ཚཉཁྱའི་མགོན་ལ་
བཞི་པརྩེངོ་མ་ཞེe
ཚདom
he
ilཅas
பாலை
slopita
ཀ
3Jy)
ارورها
གཡོན་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་ལམ་ན་མ་
མནན
།
Plate21Ms. II, f. 25-99
Supplementary divinations concerning the impact of the hour of divination
Figures are discussed below as follows: fig. 1, Part II; figs 2–7, Part VII



42
The White Beryl
འཚེ་མི་ཆེས་
༨ཁྱད་རྣཔའ་དར་
སྡུག་ཁྱད་
སྲོགཅོད་ར་སྤྲས་དཀར་སྡོགརྩོད་འགྲམ་ན་
སྲོག་དབུདྡ་ལན་བྱསྔགཙད་གྲས་ལུ་
，
པས
ཚོའི་ས་
འདུག་སུ་གྱི་ལྟས་དུན་འགྲུབམེདུས
དབང་ཀླུང་ར་
ད
བང་ཀླུང་ཁྱད་
5
དིརཁྱདམདེ་
ཕྲག་རྗེས་ཁྱབ་
orca
ཤར་རཚཙུམ་ནཾས་ཁྱེར་ཡོང་།
Press
།
Plate 22 Ms. , f. 30-35
Supplementary divinations concerning the impact of the hour of divination
Figures are discussed below as follows: fig. 1, Part II; figs 2–7, Part VII



43
The Plates
ན་
མོས་བརྟགས་
༡
7
ཐུའི་སྒོ་ནས་ཁྱེར་བྱ་ཡབསཞསེམས་
མཚེས་མི་ཞ
ཁྱེར་ཡ།



The origins and transmission of elemental divination



46
The White Beryl
The origin and transmission of the lineage of Buddhist elemental divination ('byung-rtsis), also known as the sPor-thang Chinese divina-
tion tradition (spor-thang nag-rtsis), is described in a number of detailed sources. The most notable of these include the two
versions of the Lo-rgyus rin-chen rtsa-phreng composed by Khams-pa Khra-bo and Khyung-nag Sāk-dar, as well as Phug-pa Mi-nyag
rGyal-mTshan dPal-bzang's sTong-thun, Phug-pa Chos-rje bSod-nams Tshe-'Dzin-pa's Khog-'bugs 'chi-med dga'-ba and Zhang's Khog-
don gsal-sgron. The abridged version presented by Sangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho in the White Beryl, Ch. 20, is said to be a synthesis derived
from those earlier works.
The mythological origin of elemental divination
According to one tradition, the primary elements ('byung-ba) emerged from the body of the bodhisattva Mañjughoṣa, to whom the origin
of this branch of divination science is attributed. More specifically, iron emerged from his inner space, wood from his exhaled breath,
water from his saliva, earth from his vision, and fire from his emblematic sword.'
The turtle-shell, which is a primeval symbol of longevity, is revered as the basis for the calculations of elemental
divination. It is said to have five aspects, namely: the turtle-shell divinations of the natural state (gnas-pa'i rus-sbal), of the material world
(chags-pa'i rus-sbal), of sentient existence (srid-pa'i rus-sbal), of symbolic emanation (sprul-pa'i rus-sbal) and of exegesis (bshad-pa'i rus-sbal)
or incision (bshas-pa'i rus-sbal).
Divination turtle of the natural state
All the buddhas of the past, present and future emerge from the atemporal turtle of the natural state, and all sentient beings of the three
world-systems of desire, form and formlessness emerge from its aspects. Within the space of the atemporal or primordial turtle of the
natural state, identified with the expanse of actual reality (dharmadhātu; Tib. chos-dbyings) or Samantabhadra, all buddhas and sentient
beings are fully present, free from the limitations of time and space, but nonetheless properly differentiated.
Divination turtle of the material world
The turtle of the material world emerged therefrom in the following manner: the mandala of the air element ('byung-ba rlung-gi dkyil-
'khor) emerged from its exhaled breath; the mandala of the water element (chu-'i dkyil-'khor) emerged from its saliva; and the mandala of
earth (sa'i dkyil-'khor), including the mountains and continents, emerged from its flesh.
Divination turtle of sentient existence
NA
0,
ALA
Above Detail of Plate 1, fig. 2 (see p.50), showing the bodhisattva
Mañughoșa
From the contact between those turtles of the natural state and the material world, the turtle of sentient existence then emerged, golden
in colour, with its head facing south and its tail facing north, and its limbs in the four intermediate directions. From the space to its front
and rear sides, the sentient beings of the god (deva) realms emerged, with the Trāyatrimśa and Paranirmitavaśavartin classes of the gods
below these on the summit of Mount Sumeru and the Four Guardian Kings (Caturmahārājakāyika) on the slopes below, along with the
sun, moon, planets and stars. From the eyes of this turtle of sentient existence emerged the sun and moon. Thunder emerged from the
clicking sound of its palate, lightning flashes (and consequently thunderbolts and hailstones) from the flicking of its tongue, and air from
its exhaled breath. The five outer elements emerged from its solid and hollow viscera, earthquakes from its bodily motion, and the
mother-trigram Khon, representing the earth, from its yellow abdomen, engendering the subterranean serpentine spirits (nāga).
There are various such accounts, according to one of which the turtle of sentient existence has two aspects: the
golden turtle of subjective consciousness (yid-byed gser-gyi rus-sbal) and the silver turtle of objective phenomena (chos-bya dngul-gyi rus-
sbal). The former, equalling heaven or space in its dimensions, lies in a supine position which exposes the ventral shell and is the natural
expression of skilful means (thabs); while the latter, equalling the dimensions of earth, lies face downwards, exposing the carapace, and is
the natural expression of discriminative awareness (shes-rab).
In particular, eight trigrams symbolic of this turtle of sentient existence then emerged: Khen (Ch. qian), the
father, symbolising heaven or space, emerged from its exhaled breath and lustre; Khon (Ch. kun), the mother, symbolising earth, emerged
from its excrement; Gin (Ch. gen), the eldest son, symbolising the mountains that link space and earth, emerged from their union; Zon
(Ch. zhuan), the eldest daughter, symbolising air, emerged from the wind between the mountains and rocks; Li (Ch. li), the second daugh-
ter, symbolising fire, emerged from the harshness and conflagration of air; Kham (Ch. kan), the incestuous offspring, emerged from rain
generated by the agitation of air and fire; Zin (Ch. zhen), the youngest daughter, symbolising wood, emerged from the trees growing up
amongst these; and Dva (Ch. dui), the second son, symbolising iron, emerged from the penetration of earth by fire.
Both Kham (water) and Zin (wood) are regarded as the incestuous offspring of Gin (mountain) and Zon (air), and
their birth or emergence is said to have agitated the celestial gods and subterranean serpentine spirits (nāga). Consequently, the eight
classes of the gods and ogres of phenomenal existence (snang-srid lha-srin sde-brgyad) came into existence, and the world of the antigods
(asura) emerged from a subsequent division between gods and ogres (rākṣasa).5 The noble past actions of the gods were exhausted, and
consequently human beings emerged, inhabiting the four continents and their subcontinents. Thereafter, the three inferior realms of
animals (tīryak), tormented spirits (preta) and hell-bound beings (naraka) came into existence. Birth and death emerged through the
power of dissonant mental states (nyon-mongs), and the cycle of rebirth through six realms gradually evolved.
Dismayed by the inauspicious upheaval of the natural order – the merging of heaven and earth, east and west, of
sun and shade – the gods asked what should be done. The bodhisattva Mañjughoṣa, the White Beryl relates, replied from the heavens, 'Do
not err in this way! You have erred in terms of the nature of existence! If the eight trigrams (kha-brgyad) had remained separate, it would
have been beneficial!
Then the eight trigrams assembled separately, each with his or her own wealth, on the golden turtle of sentient
existence. The father (Khen) was entwined with the left leg of the turtle, and the mother (Khon) with the left arm, while the younger
daughter (Li) was placed at its head, the second son (Dva) at its heart, the first incestuous offspring (Kham) at the tail, and the second
(Zin) at the right armpit, the eldest daughter (Zon) at the first tier of Mount Sumeru and thence the right arm, and the eldest son (Gin),
who became the general of the spirit lords of the soil (sa-bdag dmag-dpon), at the right leg. Following this separation, conflict then arose
between Gin and Zon, Dva and Zin, Khon and Khen, and between Kham and Li, in consequence of which the eight trigrams (kha-brgyad)
became known as the ‘eight blazing trigrams' (spar-kha brgyad).?
Opposite Detail of the Svarodaya fragment (see p. 21) showing
Sākyamuni Buddha



47
The origins and transmission of elemental divination
ONS



48
The White Beryl
Forming their retinue encircling the body of the golden turtle of sentient existence, were the twelve male and female offspring (bu-tsha
ming-sring bcu-gnyis) who gave their names to the temporal divisions of year, month, day and hour. Among these, the tiger and the hare
were respectively the male and female offspring of Zin; the dragon was the son of Zon; the horse and the snake were respectively the male
and female offspring of Li; the sheep was the daughter of Khon; the bird and the monkey were respectively the male and female offspring
of Dva; the dog was the son of Khen; the mouse and the pig were respectively the male and female offspring of Kham; and the ox was the
daughter of Gin. Consequently, in the paintings that follow, the base colours attributed to the twelve animals correspond to the parental
elements of the trigrams.
Mount Wu Tai Shan
The six sages (thub-pa drug) emanated respectively in the six realms of sentient existence to alleviate the sufferings of the six classes of
living beings. Among them was Sākyamuni Buddha, who emanated in the world of human beings, particularly in India. He and his close
disciples opened the door for the teachings, practices and goals of Buddhism; and Mañjughoṣa consequently materialised the turtle of
emanation (sprul-pa'i rus-sbal). Other emanations also appeared for the benefit of living beings, such as gShen-rab among the Bon-pos of
Zhang-zhung, Jīvaka and other Indian teachers of medicine, refiners of Persian gemstones and masters of the arts of warfare. As far as the
science of elemental divination is concerned, it was the bodhisattva Mañjughoșa who symbolised the apparitional modes of the material
world and its sentient existence by means of the illustrative divination turtle of emanation.
In antiquity, the bodhisattva Mañjughoṣa emanated in a youthful form in China, during the reign of the Emperor
dByig-gnyan,'' at Mount Wu Tai Shan. This sacred place, which is 22 yojana and 2 krosa in area," is situated to the west of the rivers
Qing Shui He and Hu Tuo He (Sutasiti), and is higher than the surrounding regions, inspiring faith at its very sight.
The central peak
As for the description of Mount Wu Tai Shan, which is depicted on Plate 1, fig. 2, the Central Mountain (1), fashioned of gold, is named
Cui Ye Feng (Ghe-'ude shan). It is shaped like a yawning lion, and is the pure land of Vairocana Buddha.12 Its height is 40 li, and the circum-
ference of its summit is 6 li.'s On the summit sits a temple, in front of a well of nectar (2), containing an image of Sākyamuni (3) on a rock
white as a conch shell, flanked by the pious attendants Śāriputra (4) and Maudgalyāyana (5), and by the bodhisattvas Mañjughoșa (6) and
Samantabhadra (7), and protected by the gatekeepers Vajrapāņi (8) and Hayagrīva (9). Around the temple is the bathing pool of the bod-
hisattvas, beautified by various lotus flowers and marked with inestimable images of stūpas (10). On the west side of this mountain is a
peak of aromatic herbs called sPos-ngad-ldan. Here there is an image of Mañjunātha (11), which appears to those of fortunate past actions
(karma)."* A temple was built there (12), at a place where in antiquity, King Ral-can reputedly saw it. On its walls are frescoes, said to be
still extant; an image of Avalokiteśvara in the form Sems-nyid ngal-gso (13), said to have been fashioned by Nāgārjuna; and an image of
the Thatāgata Śākyamuni surrounded by his closest sons. There are shimmering masses of yellow flowers, and captivating fragrances.
The eastern peak
To the east is the mountain called Wang Hai Feng (rDo-rje brtsegs-pa; 14, left), which is fashioned of crystal and shaped like a yawning
elephant, and is the pure land of Akşobhya Buddha. Its height is 32 li, and the circumference of its summit is 3 li. In this place is a temple
containing a buddha image (15), as well as the temples of the five sibling nāga kings (klu-rgyal spun-Inga) who are spirit lords of the soil
(bhumipatı) (16). There are stone stūpas (17), a cool spring (18), and tens of thousands of footprints attributed to the bodhisattva Mañjuśrī
(19), conferring benefits on living beings. Within the so-called Asura Cave (20), there is a potent stream of nectar (21) and at its dragon-
shaped source are images of the bodhisattvas Samantabhadra and Mañjuśrī (22), dispelling the fundamental ignorance of living beings.
There are also gemstone treasures (23), and a footprint of Mañjughoṣa on a rock of beryl (24). Within the so-called Shen-tsha Cave are
images of the bodhisattvas Mañjunātha and Manibhadra.
The southern peak
To the south is the mountain called Jin Xiu Feng (Rin-chen brTsegs-pa; 25, top), which is fashioned of yellow a-krols and shaped like a
reclining horse. It is the pure land of Ratnasambhava Buddha. Its height is 37 li and the circumference of its summit 2 li. Here will
be found a palatial temple containing an image of Mañjughosa (26), and also a consecrated stone image of the Buddha (27). There is also
a throne fashioned completely of precious gems (28), where Mañjughoṣa himself sat. Resplendent and instantly seen to be ten arm-
spans (gzhu-'dom) in width, the throne is capable of holding an assembly of two thousand, with hundreds to its sides – a truly
wondrous spectacle, which is reported to enable beings to recollect many lives just through its sight or touch. In front of it is a
wondrous well of pure cooling water (29), used as a bathing pool by the sublime Mañjughoṣa. The drops of its water alleviate
various aches and pains, and by drinking it one can proceed to liberation. Moreover, there is a pleasant spring where seven girls
bathed (30), and a long-bladed bluish grass, with rainbow markings, known as 'bodhisattva thread' (byang-sems skud-pa; 31),16 the
aromatic fragrance of which alleviates all ailments.
The western peak
To the west is the mountain called Gua Yue Feng (Padma brtsegs-pa; 32, right), fashioned of rubies and shaped like a dancing peacock. It is
the pure land of Amitābha Buddha. Its height is 35 li, and the circumference of its summit is 2 li. Here will be found the power place and
temple of Mañjughoșa, king of serpentine nāga spirits (33), in front of which are two springs (34). To the south-west is a nectar stream
(35) shaped like a turquoise dragon. By drinking its waters ailments are alleviated. Slightly to the east is a throne (36) which resounds
with a lion's roar in praise of Mañjughoșa and his sons. Its very sight inspires faith, and it is surrounded for a distance of 5 li on the shady
side of the mountain by a host of Mañjuśrī images (37). There is also an image of Upāsaka Licchāvi, surrounded by arhats and bod-
hisattvas (38); and a spring endowed with the eight qualities of pure water (39), 17 which rises and falls according to the degree of negativ-
ity and obscurations of the beings who behold it. This water pacifies disharmony and has attributes which bring benefit in the next life. In
such extraordinary sublime ways, its praiseworthy qualities are manifestly seen. There is also an awesome cavern where, in antiquity,
Mañjuvajra subdued Māra and Yama (40).
The northern peak
To the north is the mountain called Ye Dou Feng (rGya-gram brtsegs-pa; 41, bottom), fashioned of sapphire and shaped like a sprawling
cīvamcīvaka.18 It is the pure land of Amoghasiddhi Buddha. Its height is 38 li and the circumference of its summit 3 li. In this place is the



49
The origins and transmission of elemental divination
temple containing images of Mañjughoșa, king of nāgas, and his sons (42); and in front is a spring where the nāgaking resides (43). Its waters
are said to subdue evil spirits. There is also a lake that is shaped like a golden dragon (44, illustrated on folio 5). Since it is most awesome,
it attracts cloud masses of malign phenomena, generated through misconduct and impurities. Thunderbolts are also cast here. In addi-
tion there is a mandala of 'Jam-sprul rgyal-ba'i rgya-mtsho (45), actually visible and emitting a musical resonance, which is heard by
faithful devotees. It is symbolised by masses of musical instruments, made of precious gems, which were offered by the nāga king. Mount
Wu Tai Shan has many wondrous attributes, but this short account will suffice here. For further descriptions the reader should refer to
other sources. 19
The stūpas of Wu Tai Shan
On their summits, these five mountains have extraordinarily sublime stūpas, representing the buddha-body of actual reality
(dharmakāya). On the central peak is a stūpa symbolising the Buddha's enlightenment (byang-chub mchod-rten; 46), endowed with symbols
of the ten levels, the five paths and the distinct attributes of the buddhas. On the eastern peak is a bkra-shis sgo-mang stūpa of the sugatas
(47), symbolising the four truths, the eight aspects of liberation and the various approaches to the doctrine. On the southern peak is a cho-
'phrul stūpa (48), with four terraced steps on each of its four sides. On the western peak is a bulbous nirvāņa stūpa (myang-'das mchod-rten;
49), and on the northern peak is a lha-babs mchod-rten stūpa (50), which brings benefits to living beings. 20
General attributes of Wu Tai Shan
In general, Mount Wu Tai Shan is cool in summer and warm in winter. It is well known for its fragrant flora, gentle breezes, medicinal
herbs, medicinal springs or pools, birds chirping the sounds of divination, fearless fauna and tame carnivores. Although the five peaks
have also been described individually owing to the great distance between them, they are collectively the foremost sacred abode of the
bodhisattva Mañjughoṣa or Mañjuśrīnātha. This bodhisattva bears the name Mañju ('jam) because he mollifies dissonant mental states,
and Śrīnātha (dpal-mgon) because he has mastery over the glorious attributes of all living beings.
Mañjughoșa's emanations
Although there are many diverse accounts of Mañjuśrīnātha's emanational birth and teaching career, from the standpoint of divination
science he is said to have emanated on the central peak of Mount Wu Tai Shan on Saturday, the fifteenth day of the first spring month
(tiger/Mārgasarśā month) in the wood male pig year, from the gnarl of a tri-sha tree. Consequently, the calculations of elemental divina-
tion nowadays begin from this point in the sexagenary cycle. Immediately thereafter, he emanated as Mañjughoșatīksna on the eastern
peak (51), Jñānasattva on the southern peak (52), Vādīsimha on the western peak (53) and Vimala on the northern peak (54).
Divination turtle of emanation
At this juncture, Mañjughoṣa materialised the symbolic emanational turtle (sprul-pa'i rus-sbal) and the reliquary divination turtle (ring-
srel rus-sbal), which is utilised at the present day in order to reveal the clear mirror of divination and benefit living beings.
As for the emanational turtle, from the saliva of his tongue he brought forth a golden turtle with its head facing
the south because he thought that this science would flourish in the south. The head is upturned, facing the sky because it is untainted by
attachments. The male has the markings of a stūpa, the female those of a lotus, and the offspring has a mottled appearance.
Hermeneutically, the expression ‘mahā gser-gyi rus-sbal (“great golden turtle') is defined as follows: ma indicates ‘all sentient beings', hā
means 'free from all conceptual elaborations', gser-gyi means ‘unchanging', rus is the ‘causal basis of the species of living beings' and sbal
means ‘skilful means and discriminative awareness'.
This emanational turtle had outer, inner and secret modes of emanation. Outwardly, through its five elements, it
emanated the twelve male life-long companion gods ('go-ba'i pho-lha bcu-gnyis); inwardly, through its eight trigrams, it emanated the
eight deities causing benefit and harm (phan-gnod byed-pa'i lha brgyad); and secretly, through its twelve animal signs, it emanated the
eighteen harmful and beneficial deities of disdain (ko-long sdom-pa'i lha bco-brgyad).
Reliquary divination turtle of exegesis or incision
The reliquary turtle (ring-bsrel-gyi rus-sbal), also known as the turtle of exegesis (bshad-pa'i rus-sbal) or turtle of incision (bshas-pa'i rus-
bal), was emanated by Mañjughoṣa in order to instruct living beings through the contemplation of his great loving kindness. The retinue
who received this instruction included gods (deva), serpentine nāga kings, antigods (asura), gods and demons of the eight classes, and
advanced human beings. First, he expounded the teachings known as the 'five emanational tantras' (sprul-rgyud rnam-lnga). They com-
prise the Tantra of Buddha-body entitled Clarifying Lamp (sku-rgyud snang-gsal sgron-me), which emerged from the crown of his head; the
Tantra of Buddha-speech entitled Great Broadside (gSung-gi rgyud 'byams-yig chen-mo), which emerged from his mouth; the Tantra of
Buddha-mind entitled Confluence of All That is Higher (Thugs-rgyud stod-dgu 'dus), which emerged from his heart; the Tantra of Buddha-
attributes entitled Indestructible Seat (Yon-tan-dag-gi rgyud rdo-rje gdan-gzhi), which emerged from his navel; and the Root Tantra of
Buddha-activities entitled Black Turtle (Phrin-las-kyi rgyud rus-sbal nag-po rtsa-rgyud), which emerged from his hands.
Once Mañjuśrīnātha had emanated these teachings, Brahmā offered a ten-spoked wheel and Vijaya offered a cam-
paka flower, consequent on which the turtle of symbolic emanation was transformed into the reliquary turtle, with its head also facing the
south. With his sword of contemplation, the bodhisattva then made an outer incision (phyi-bshas-pa'i tshul), penetrating the turtle from
the right side so that the iron tip emerged at the left side (west), and the wooden hilt remained embedded at the right side (east). The
exhaled breath from the south-facing head then gave rise to fire, and the excretion of urine from its lower end (north) gave rise to water.
The element earth was inherent in the four limbs. He also made an internal incision (nang bshas-pa'i tshul) corresponding to that, pene-
trating the nerves in the east (wood), the breath in the south (fire), the bones in the west (iron), the blood and serum in the north (water),
and the flesh in the intermediate directions (earth). Lastly, he made a secret incision (gsang bshas-tshul), penetrating the liver (east), heart
(south), lungs (west), kidneys (north) and spleen (intermediate directions).
The following didactic charts of these hidden points (gab-tshe) were thus displayed on the body of the turtle:
1. South (head): chart of the heart and fire, the trigram Li, the horse and snake signs, Sun and six southern constellations, and beings of
the fire constitutional type, through which divinations are made concerning oneself and one's children.
2. North (tail): chart of the kidneys and water, the trigram Kham, the mouse and pig signs, Moon, Mercury and six northern



Pass
OR
SO
90
Ram COM
pics
DIGITARNIR
ya
ALAQ
Anne
anama
O
UTA
21 22
OBD
IN
QUILABLE
CA
OSALON
DAN
colo
TO
STOU
TES
LIPA
SEVME22
Val
VIEWS
ZI
2
EN
ORY
11
WA
DIC
EST
1
YA
OB
ARE
Teen
STOC
Det
XIN
SO ZA
(
RO
N
S.
D
SA
SE
OX
SA
SIN
F1
EN
FLEECETAS
JASA



51
The origins and transmission of elemental divination
Plate 1, fig. 2 (Ms I: ff.3-5): Wu Tai Shan (rGya-nag Ri-bo rtse-Inga); Power place of elemental divination
1 The central peak, named Cui Ye Feng (Ghe-'ude shan), fashioned of gold.
19 and tens of thousands of bodhisattva (Manjuśri) footprints.
2 Temple in front of a well of nectar,
20 Within the so-called Asura Cave,
21 there is a potent stream of nectar,
3 containing an image of Sākyamuni.
4 Flanked by the pious attendants Śāriputra
22 and at its source are images of bodhisattvas (Samantabhadra and] Mañjughoșa.
23 There are also gemstone treasures,
5 and Maudgalyāyana,
6 the bodhisattvas Mañjughoșa
24 and footprints of Mañjughoṣa on a rock of beryl.
7 and Samantabhadra,
8 and protected by the gatekeepers Vajrapāņi
9 and Hayagrīva.
37 and surrounded by a host of Mañjuśrī images.
38 There is also an image of Upāsaka Licchāvi,
39 and a spring endowed with the eight qualities of pure water.
40 The awesome cavern, where Mañjuvajra subdued Māra and Yama.
41 The northern peak, named Ye Dou Feng (rGya-gram brtsegs-pa), fashioned of sapphire.
42 Temple containing images of Manjughoșa, king of nāgas, and his sons,
43 with a spring in front where the nāga king resides.
44 Lake shaped like a golden dragon.
45 Mandala of Jam-sprul rgyal-ba'i rgya-mtsho.
46 Enlightenment Stūpa of the central peak (byang-chub mchod-rten).
47 bkra-shis sgo-mang Stūpa of the eastern peak.
48 Cho-'phrul Stūpa of the southern peak.
49 Nirvāņa Stupa of the western peak (myang-'das mchod-rten).
50 Descent from the God Realms Stupa of the northern peak (Iha-babs mchod-rten).
51 Mañjughoșatīkşņa on the eastern peak (with gold inscription: shar-rir 'jam-dpal rnon-po).
52 Jñānasattva on the southern peak (with gold inscription: Iho-rir ye-shes sems-dpa).
53 Vāļīsimha on the western peak [with gold inscription: nub-du smra-ba'i seng-ge).
54 Vimala on the northern peak (with gold inscription: byang-du dri-med).
25 The southern peak, named Jin Xiu Feng (Rin-chen brtsegs-pa), fashioned of a-kro.
26 The palatial temple containing an image of Mañjughoșa,
27 and also a consecrated stone image of the Buddha.
28 The gemstone throne of Mañjughoșa,
29 in front of which is a wondrous well of pure cooling water,
30 a pleasant spring where seven girls bathed,
31 and the long-bladed bodhisattva thread' grass (byang-sems skud-pa/rtsa kun-bzang).
32 The western peak, named Gua Yue Feng (Padma brtsegs-pa), fashioned of rubies.
33 The power place and temple of Mañughoșa, king of nāgas,
10 Around the temple is the bathing pool of the bodhisattvas, marked with stūpas.
11 The Mañjuśrīnātha image of sPos-ngad-Idan Hill to the west side of this mountain (no gold inscription).
12 A temple was built there, marking the site of King Ral-can's vision,
13 containing a sacred image of Avalokiteśvara in the form Sems-nyid ngal-gso.
14 The eastern peak, named Wang Hai Feng (rDo-rje brtsegs-pa), fashioned of crystal.
15 A temple containing a buddha image.
16 The temples of the five sibling nāga kings (klu-rgyal spun-Inga), the spirit lords of the soil (bhumipat).
34 in front of which are two springs.
17 There are stone stūpas,
35 To the south-west is a nectar stream.
36 Slightly to its east is a throne, resounding with praises of Mañughoșa,
18 a cool spring,
28
53
12
22
? Hués
CI
face
o o
o de
45
Opposite Plate 1, fig. 2



ระยา assistan
เอาเป็น
-
รา
1
นาย
ใน
1
2 -
24 25 26
2
น
.
- -
ๆ
ระยอง
งาน
s
นะ
.
.
-
2
ระหนะ
-
- -
2
น
1
-
A
2 ก้
อน
1
4
น. วัน
อาหาร
ราคา
:
200
-
ราคา
2
2
1
24 25
บ
าท
นายน
พ.ศ.
2
"



53
The origins and transmission of elemental divination
Opposite Detail of Plate 1, fig. 2 (see p. 50), showing the
Mañjuśrīnātha image of the Central Peak at Wu Tai Shan, with the
Enlightenment Stūpa to the rear
constellations, and beings of the water constitutional type, through which divinations are made concerning in-laws and female ancestors.
3. East (wood): chart of the liver and wood, the trigram Zin, the tiger and hare signs, Jupiter and six eastern constellations, and beings of
the wood constitutional type through which divinations are made concerning male ancestors.
4. West (iron): chart of the lungs and iron, the trigram Dva, the bird and monkey signs, Venus and six western constellations, and beings
of the iron constitutional type, through which divinations are made concerning maternal relatives and protector deities.
5. Earth (intermediate directions): chart of the spleen and earth; the trigrams Khon, Khen, Gin and Zon; the ox, sheep, dog and dragon
signs; Saturn and the four intermediate constellations, and beings of the earth constitutional type through which divinations are made
concerning land and houses.
All the relationships calculated in the divination process - including those of identity, mother, son, friend and enemy types – and those of
the twelve sectors of growth and decline,21 are comprehended on the basis of those five elements.
Thereafter, the eight trigrams arose from the turtle's eight aggregates of consciousness (rnam-shes tshogs-brgyad): Li from its visual
consciousness, Zin from its audial consciousness, Zon from its olfactory consciousness, Kham from its gustatory consciousness, Gin
from its tactile consciousness, Khen from its mental consciousness, Khon from its substratum consciousness and Dva from its
defiled consciousness. 22
From the turtle’s nine orifices emerged the nine numeric squares (sme-ba gling-dgu): White One from the right
eye (associated with the deities gNam-the dkar-po and Tho-rang dkar-skya spun gcig); Black Two from the left eye (associated with the
deities sBal-nag dom-nag and Mya-ngan sdug-gi mtsho); Blue Three from the mouth (associated with the deities Nag-po spun-gsum and
Bye-bral gyod-kyi rlung gsum); Green Four from the genitals (associated with the deities gNyan-chen sme-bzhi and gYang-kyi du-ba
spun bzhi); Yellow Five from the right nostril (associated with the deities dBus-dang phyogs-kyi sa-bdag and gSer-gyi me-tog rtse-
Inga); White Six from the right ear (associated with the deities Yab-lha rdel-drug and dPal-gyi nyi-ma spun drug); Red Seven from the
left nostril (associated with the deities dMar-ba skya-bdun and bShan-pa lag-dmar spun-bdun); White Eight from the left ear (associated
with the deities bKra-shis lha-brgyad and Me-tog ha-lo mched-brgyad); and Red Nine from the buttocks (associated with the deities
dMu-dang sri dgu and gYang-gi gYung-drung spun-dgu).23
The eight planets then emerged from the turtle’s eight fangs. Among them, the Sun and Mars are associated with
fire, the Moon and Mercury with water, Jupiter and Venus with earth, and Saturn with iron. Rahu is all-embracing. According to another
tradition, Mercury and Jupiter emerged from the turtle's arms, Mars and Saturn from its legs, and the Sun, Moon and Venus from its
body. Rahu is said to have emerged from the upper incisors and Ketu from the lower incisors. 24
The twenty-eight constellations then emerged from the turtle's twenty-eight vertebrae, commencing with
Křttika (smin-drug). Specifically, the six eastern constellations emerged from the six upper vertebrae, indicative of wood (stod-kyi shing-
tshigs drug); the south-eastern constellation from the seventh vertebra, indicative of air (bdun-pa'i rlung-tshigs); the six southern constella-
tions from the six dorsal vertebrae, indicative of fire (rgyab-gung me-tshigs drug); the south-western constellation from the fourteenth ver-
tebra (bcu-bzhi-pa'i tshigs); the six western constellations from the six lumbar vertebrae, indicative of iron (rked-pa lcags-tshigs); the
north-western constellation from the twenty-first vertebra, indicative of space (nyer-gcig-pa nam-mkha'i tshigs); the six northern constel-
lations from the six lower vertebrae, indicative of water (smad-kyi chu-tshigs drug); and the north-eastern constellation from the twenty-
eighth vertebra (nyer-brgyad-pa ngan-khungs tshigs). According to another tradition, the eastern constellations emerged from the spinal
cord, the southern ones from the metabolism, the western ones from the bones, the northern ones from the blood and the intermediate
ones from the flesh.25
The twelve animal signs are said to have emerged from the turtle's twelve sensory activity fields (skye-mched bcu-
gnyis); and the eighteen sensory constituents (khams bcu-brgyad) from its flesh, including water from its blood, air from its exhaled breath,
iron from its bones, and wood etc. from its nerves and blood vessels.26 Similarly, the vitality elements (srog) emerged from its substratum
consciousness, the body elements (lus) from its defiled consciousness, the destiny elements (dbang-thang) from its mental consciousness,
and the luck elements (klung) from its five sensory consciousnesses. 27
In all, the bodhisattva materialised an infinite number of didactic charts of hidden points, but all of them were
fashioned of the five primary elements. Each of these has its respective colour, numbers, shape and outer, inner and secret aspects, as
explained in White Beryl, ff. 143a-144a. 28
Another tradition reports that the female bodhisattva Vijaya pierced the emanational turtle’s outer, inner and
secret forms with her nine-pointed golden sword in the Trāyatrimśa paradise, where the turtle is seated on a great fossilised stone
(amolingka).
Transmission of elemental divination
The upper cartouches of Plates 2–3 include ninety-nine figures or lineage-holders, whose importance for the transmission of elemental
divination and our manuscript will be outlined in this section. An unbroken transmission or lineage is considered to be essential for the
continuity of the teachings from one generation to the next, and this applies not only to the spiritual lineages of Buddhism but also to the
instructions associated with the lesser sciences, including divination. Portraiture in Tibet, as expressed in murals (ldebs-ris), painted
scrolls (thang-ga) and manuscript illuminations (dpe-ris), is highly stylised and hagiographic. Despite such constraints, the skilled artist
is able to evoke the subject's character through distinctive facial expressions. Further information concerning the subject’s lay or monas-
tic status, occupation, expertise or meditational deity may be provided through the depiction of the subject's dress, coiffure and hand-
implements, and the peripheral background objects, as well as through the wording of the caption inscribed below each of these figures.
For example, nothing appears to be known of the councillor Kun-dga' who commissioned the paintings (no. 99, depicted on Plate 13, see
p. 59) but for the fact that he is depicted as a venerable monk, a respected master surrounded by artists, and that his meditational deity is
Kurukullā. Some figures are depicted holding the sPor-thang divination scrolls, which suggests their prestige within this particular line-
age; while others, such as Padmākara, are more frequently depicted in the context of other diverse Buddhist lineages, not confined to ele-
mental divination. The plates depicting these ninety-nine lineage-holders break down as follows:



54
The White Beryl
Plate 2: Dalai Lama v, the teacher of the regent Sangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho, is respectfully placed at the beginning (1), followed by the
Buddhas of the Three Times (dus-gsum sangs-rgyas; 2–4) along with the three bodhisattvas including Mañjughosa, who are known as the
Lords of the Three Enlightened Families (rigs-gsum mgon-po; 5–7); the four suppliants (zhu-ba-po bzhi; 8–11); and three of the four
emanational persons (12–14).
Plate 3: From Vang-the 'Phrul-gyi rGyal-po (15) to Hermit-sage ICe-mur-ba (20).
Plate 4: From Hermit-sage Phur-bu (21) to Ye-shes rGyal-ba (28).
Plate 5: From gTsang-gYu Zher-ba (29) to Lang-tsho mDong/ldong-yags (38).
Plate 6: From gYu-sgra (39) to Lo-tsā She'u Hūm-chen (50).
Plate 7: From rGya-paņ Jing-ken (51) to Khams-pa Lo-tsā gTsug-ston (58).
Plate 8: From Padmākara (59) to Dum-pa rGya-zhang-grom (61).
Plate 9: From Pan-chen Da-hur Nag-po (62) to Se-ston Khri (71).
Plate 10: From Myos-kyi ston-pa (72) to Rigs-'dzin gZhon-nu gDong-drug (83).
Plate 11: From Zur-chen Chos-dbyings Rang-grol (84) to bSod-nams Tshe 'dzin-pa (89).
Plate 12: From bSod-nams Grags-pa (90) to Lu-'go Bla-mkhyen Vagendra (94).
Plate 13: From Sangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho (95) to Kun-dga', commissioner of the manuscript (99).
སྲིད་ཞིའི་སྙགསཨན་ཐུར་མ་9a འདེས་པའི་
20ཛyQQམ་པོ་ཕྲུ་ལྔའི་ཡུལྟ༔ Wཞིང་སྐལ་བ་མཉམ་
Grinzana cena
ERSTE 573
C2
VATROSTAR
The four suppliants (Plate 2, fig. 1)
On the basis of this series of didactic divination charts, Mañjuśrīnātha taught all the tantras of divination science to four main recipients.
These four are all representative of the Indic tradition, the first two having divine status, the third the status of a serpentine nāga king,
and the fourth that of a human sage. Among them, Brahmā (8) received the tantras, transmissions, commentaries and instructions, along
with the Dakki snang-gsal ma-bu lnga, the divinations concerning the arts of warfare (dmag-dang ru-mtshon gdab-pa) and the divinations of
the Sun, Moon, planets and stars. Vijaya (9) received the Rus-sbal rang-'dra'i rgyud and the divination techniques concerning marriage
(Tib. bag-rtsis; Ch. gi-gong). Nāgarāja Takşaka (10) received the Rus-sbal-gyi gtan-tshigs rang-dran skye-gnas rgyud, along with the rTen-
cing 'brel-rgyud, its Phyi-ma ljon-shing lo-'tshol khrus-byed rgyud, and divination techniques concerning natal horoscopes. Lastly, Brahmāņa
Kapila (11) received the 'Byung-ba mtshan-don bstan-pa'i mdo, the Phyi-ma yi-ge'i mdo'i 'grel-pa, its Phyi mtshan-gyi don-bstan mdo, the Kha-
bkad bye-brag 'byed-pa'i rgyud, and so forth.
༧སྨན་ཟླ་ཞ45་ལ་རྒྱུའ།
པ་ཐག་པའི་སྨན་དེ་ཤུབློབ། དྷབོ་ཚེ་
ls98ཀྑ ཞྭ་ལུ། ཏུ་མཱ་རབྷ༢-ཝུས་
10
11
The four emanational persons (Plates 2–3, fig. 1)
The four emanational persons, who are all legendary Chinese lineage-holders, were known as Kong-tse 'Phrul-gyi rGyal-po (12),
Ji-kong 'Phrul-rgyal (13), Ji-nong 'Phrul-rgyal (14) and Vang-the 'Phrul-gyi rGyal-po (15). Initially, the first of these, who has been
identified by some contemporary Tibetan scholars with Confucius or an earlier emanation of Confucius, is said to have naturally compre-
hended the dPyad-brgyad khri-bzhi stong sum-brgya drug-cu'i gto. Collectively, they acquired and mastered 356 tantras including the Mahā
nag-po rtsa-rgyud, the 'Jig-rten sgron-me snga-rtags rgyud, the rDo-rje gdan-bzhi phyi-rtags rgyud, the 'Byung ba-den bstan-thabs-kyi rgyud,
the mKha'-'gro rdo-rje gtsug-lag rgyud, the rTsa-ba'i rgyud Inga, the Phyi-ma gyim-shad dmigs-sel gson-gyi rgyud, the Zang-kyam rin-chen
gshin-gyi rgyud, and so forth. Individually, too, Vang-the, who may perhaps be identified with King Wan of Zhou, obtained the mTshang-
kha bkang byin-brlabs rgyud and the Lha-rgyud che-chung, Kong-tse obtained the Sa-rgyud bong-mgo 'phrul-bam bdun; Ji-nong obtained the
'Byams-yig chen-mo'i 'grel-pa; and Ji-kong, possibily synonymous with King You of Zhou, whose personal name was Jigongnie, obtained
the gShin-rgyud bi-'dir chen.
སྶ་མ ཤུ་སྤྱི་རྒྱན་གྱི་
གང་འཔ་རྒྱཉྩ བྷདུན༠ཊྛན=ང་3ལ་རྒྱུ''རོ། ཞུ་༣༢།
འb52337w ས
ང་ཕྱི་ཉལ་གྱི་རྒྱུG;
13
14
15



55
The origins and transmission of elemental divination
Later, it was Ze-'u Kong-'phrul chung who determined that yearly divination charts should be based on the wood mouse year, and
monthly ones on the first spring month (fire male tiger), corresponding to the time of Mañjughosa's original teachings.
Some 360 years later, also in a wood mouse year, at sunrise on Saturday the first day of the fire tiger month,
Kong-tse 'Phrul-gyi rGyal-po is said to have emanated as the son of one Gyim-shad Nag-po.29 Elsewhere it is said that, after the
parinirvāṇa of Śākyamuni Buddha, Mañjughoșa emanated in China as Kong-tse.90 He then obtained 360 divination charts of hidden
points (gab-tshe), along with all the computational charts (bskor-'go) and tantra texts, which the White Beryl enumerates on f. 148b. These
were all subsumed in the divination charts of buddha-body (sku'i gab-tshe), which concern the elements; the divination charts of buddha-
speech (gsung-gi gab-tshe), which concern the tantras taught by Mañjughoșa; and the divination charts of buddha-mind (thugs-kyi gab-
tshe), which concern the comprehension of those.
The four recipients and four keepers (Plate 3, fig. 1)
The aforementioned four suppliants who originally requested the teachings from Mañjughoșa, together with the four emanational persons,
collectively taught the four hermit-sages bDe-ba-len (16), Nye-bar-len (17), Kun-tu len (18) and Yang-dag-len (19). Subsequently the latter
group became known as the four recipients. They, in turn, taught the tantras of divination science to the hermit-sages who maintained the
lineage, namely 1Ce-mur-ba (20), Phur-bu (21), Thor-cog (22) and Nag-po (23). This last group became known as the four keepers.
All of these suppliants, emanations, recipients and keepers (zhu-'phrul len-'chang) are said to have collectively com-
posed 360 treatises to facilitate the comprehension of Buddhist elemental divination, which consequently became renowned in China. 31
295
16
3 025 AIAKO
Kཉི་ཤུ་གཚུབའ་བ།་ཨུ། རྣ་ཏུ 3ན་པར་གླང་སུ་ང་ཆེ།
ཡངརྟག་༣ཚ་བ་སྣང་ཤིང་འཛིན། བདག་ལ་འདུ་་ ་མ ་དུ།
KK
ན་ ( gy,
[༢༥༣ དུ ༣ཆང་ཁྱེར་ནས་པོ་ཆེ། །
ང་ལ《ལྟ བསྤུཔ། ཕྱི་ལས་འ8ར། བློས>ལ། དྷ
22
17
18
19
20
21
23
Tibetan translations of elemental divination
In the case of Tibet, the texts of elemental divination were transmitted through a long continuous oral lineage (ring-brgyud bka'-ma) and
also through a more immediate or close lineage of revelation (nye-brgyud gter-ma). 92 We will firstly look at the oral transmission.
Although elemental divination appears to have been introduced from the reign of gNam-ri Srong-btsan (circa 560–630) (24), it was not
extensively propagated at that time because there were no texts available. Translations from Chinese were subsequently made in the
following early, intermediate and later phases.
AKInzis&NKS
24
a) Early translation phase (Plates 3-6, fig. 1)
This phase itself constitutes three periods of time, corresponding to the reigns of three important Tibetan kings, which are known as the
earliest, intermediate and later periods. In the earliest period (mid-seventh century), King Srong-btsan sGam-po (25) and Queen
Wencheng (26) sent four intelligent Tibetans to China to study under the guidance of the Chinese master 'Bar-ba Tshom-tshom (27).
These were named Ye-shes rGyal-ba (28), gTsang-gYu gZher (29), 'Bro-gnyer brTan-pa (30) and Ra-bla mkhyen (31). Together, they
translated nine tantras, three commentaries and fifteen divination charts, which the White Beryl enumerates on f. 149 a/b.
Then, in the intermediate period (early eighth century), during the reign of Mes'ag tshom (32) and Queen
Jincheng (33), the seven tantras and supplement (le-lag) enumerated in White Beryl, f. 148b, were also translated.
Lastly, in the later period (late eighth century), during the reign of Khri-srong IDe'u-btsan (34), the master Sems-
brtse (35) was invited from China. He taught the four ‘gateways to divinatory investigation' (dpyad-sgo): the eastern gateway or divina-
tion, concerning obstacle years (keg-rtsis); the southern gateway or divination, concerning marital relationships (gnyan-rtsis); the western
gateway, or geomancy (khang-rtsis); and the northern gateway, or divination of death (ro-lam-gyi rtsis). He also taught the so-called “seven
attributes' (yon-tan bdun), which the White Beryl enumerates on f. 149b, and imparted many geomantic instructions for the construction of
royal palaces, temples, stūpas and ordinary dwellings.
Thereafter, a group headed by Dahura Nag-po and including Mahāyānasūtra and Mahārājadeva, the translator
Indrabhadho (37), and also Khams Khra Dang-po, received teachings from the Chinese scholar Dar-chen Thig-le (36). Another group of
19:14 NIKE
A
3264
10719 787470
WANN
gost
WOXA ROTATOR
21
28
26
30
29
25



56
The White Beryl
ARRATISENSEN
TINTSONERO
BENNASTO
31
33
34
35
36
four – comprising Lang-tsho mDong-yags (38), gYu-sgra (39), Khu-shog mKhan-po (40) and rGya-gYu bzang (41) – gradually prepared
further translations, including the charts of Bal-mo lding-skor, which White Beryl enumerates on ff. 1496–150a. At the request of Khams-
khra Dang-po, they then made a further series of translations (enumerated on f. 150a). So extensive were the works produced by these
groups that the Injunctions of Padmasambhava (Thang-yig) and other sources assert that all texts of elemental divination derived from the
bodhisattva Mañjughoṣa were translated at this time, the majority being concealed as treasure-doctrines (gter-chos) for the benefit of pos-
terity. There are also some works attributed to the celebrated translator Vairocana.
At the end of the early period, the translator Khyung-po rDo-rje 'Bar-ba (42) received instructions from the
Chinese master Lo-ma Shi-ma-la, and further works, enumerated in White Beryl, f. 150a, were rendered in Tibetan.
SK 254
2553
NANNSSAAB
TRAZI
BI5353 51
ENTERTAR
37
38
39
40
41
-
42
b) Intermediate translation phase (Plate 6, fig. 1)
In the first stage of the intermediate translation period (ninth century), the Chinese preceptor Shes-rab Bla-ma (43) imparted instruction-
s to mKhas-pa Ber-sngon-can (44), who then produced further translations (enumerated in White Beryl, ff. 150a/b). In the second stage,
the Chinese scholar Pan-chen Khri-ma Mahāyāna (45) worked with the Tibetan translator Khams-pa Ling-tsi (46), and the Chinese
scholar Bhan-tsa Nag-po (47) with the translator Bran-pha Padma (48). Their translations are also enumerated in White Beryl, f. 150b.
Then, in the next stage, the Chinese master Śrī Mahā-yāna came to Tibet and many other translations were made (enumerated on ff.
1500–151a). During the final stage of the intermediate translations, the Chinese master Ra-hu dMar-po (49) instructed Khams Khra
Dang-po and the Tibetan translator She'u Hūm-chen (50), whose works are enumerated on f. 151a.
ASA
རྒྱ་པཆ་བྷལུག་ཆུ། ལ་ རྒྱུ་ པདཱའི་སྙཚོན།།
ANASAY
44
S94
15 50 1937 wa N
45
6133
43
46
48
49
50
c) Later translation phase (Plate 7, fig. 1)
In the first stage of the later translations, the Chinese scholar Jing-ken or 'Dzing-kang (51) taught Mi-nyag Dar-'dzin or 'dzin-dar (52).
Their translations are listed in White Beryl, f. 151a. In the middle stage, the Chinese scholar Byams-chen Grags-pa (53) taught Khams-pa
Bha-yu Chos-kyi rgyal (54) and their translations (ff. 151a/b) included important works such as the Five Mother and Three Son Cycles of the
Clarifying Lamp (sNang-gsal ma-lnga bu-gsum). Then, in the next stage, the Chinese preceptor Tsa-ma-li (55) instructed the Tibetan
translator Khams-pa Zhva-ser (56), and together they translated various other works (enumerated on f. 151b). Lastly, in the final stage of
the later translations, the Chinese scholar Kun-'byung A-lo-che (57), working with Khams-pa Lo-tsā gTsug-ston (58), produced further
translations (see f. 151b), and he also managed to restore one volume of Nāgarāja Takşaka's original teaching entitled Gathering of All
Precious Elements ( 'Byung-ba rin-chen kun-'dus).
6a SUNNIVAL
1
6261739
9549
མ་ཀུན་ང་ཚོ་མདུ་འy། བརྣ་ལ་ཕྱི་པ་ལ་གཅན་
56
57
52
53
54
55
58



57
The origins and transmission of elemental divination
gTer-ma transmissions of elemental divination (Plates 8–9, fig. 1)
Now to turn to the more immediate transmission of revelation or treasure (gter-ma),33 through which ancient teachings are revitalised in
a contemporary setting. Mañjughosa is said to have concealed his treasure-doctrines for the benefit of posterity on the eastern peak of
Mount Wu Tai Shan. Padmākara then emanated in the form of Brahmā and extracted these (see White Beryl, f. 152a), which thereafter
were transmitted as an oral (bka'-ma) lineage in China. Other reports suggest that it was the Brahmāņa Kapila who extracted them.
Later in Tibet, at the time of bSam-yas's construction (circa 775–779), the Chinese master Dar-chen Thig-le
arrived, and works of divination were concealed as treasure-doctrines by Padmākara (59), along with other texts, in the middle storey of
the dBu-rtse Temple. Subsequently various treasure-finders (gter-ston) appeared, including Shangs-pa mDze-sngon, but Padmākara’s
treasures were brought forth by the treasure-master (gter-gyi bdag-po) Jo-sras-che or Jo-bo Sras (60), along with the Chinese preceptor
and senior monk Ne-le'i Mi-pa Bhalo, and Dar-chen dBar-gyi Thig-le, and the Tibetan translator Bhila-shod. All these texts were later
incorporated within the collected treasure doctrines of the gter-ston Dum-pa rGya-zhang-grom (b. 1016) (61).34
Further treasure-doctrines of elemental divination which had been concealed within the Blue Stūpa at bSam-yas
were brought forth by Khyung-nag Śāk-dar, who was an ordained monk and a contemporary of Me-long rDo-rje (1243–1303). In addi-
tion, the treasure-doctrine entitled Precious Clarifying Lamp (Rin-chen gsal-ba'i sgron-me) was reputedly revealed in a vision by
Mañjughoșa to Pan-chen Da-hu-ra Nag-po (62). The latter is one of the most important figures in the lineage, responsible for clarifying
obscurities in divinatory calculation. In further visions, Da-hu-ra also imparted his revelations to the ancient hermit-sage Phur-bu, as
well as to Bram-ze-ma, Mu-tig Zur-phud INga-ma and gYu-sher. Then, he physically gave the teachings to Pan-chen Ra-hu dMar-po-
che (63) and the Chinese scholar Zla-ba Nag-po (64). The texts based on his teachings were translated into Tibetan by Khams-pa Khra-bo
(65), who had already mastered the equivalent oral transmission. Although many texts, such as the Rus-sbal rang-'dra'i rgyud, were left
untranslated, this last figure is credited with a vast number of authoritative translations, which the White Beryl enumerates on
ff. 153b-154a. All these texts he then transmitted to the learned Ras (Ral) Bheravajra (66) in 'Phan-yul. He, in turn, taught Shang-pa
sMon-lam 'Khrul-pa-che (67), who redacted and taught the essential Tantra of Accurate Divination from the Mother Cycle of the Clarifying
Lamp (gSal-sgron-ma dag-rtsis-kyi rgyud) to 'Khrul-gsal 'Degs-pa Ya-tsa-ba (68) and Lho-brag Mar-pa sPrul-mgo (69), ensuring that the
tradition of elemental divination was more widely propagated.
5
GO
སྣ་དུ་མཐུནྟེ་ཥཱ་གར་པ་འབf
JAE3151416339
SZER 416251367a
60
61
62
ས་ བློ་རྙེསད་“༢།།'13ང་མས་སྨད་ཀླུ་མཆ༽
F43162
ELASTANTS
RASARITIMESTEST
64
65
66
67
68
69



58
The White Beryl
Accurate lineage of elemental divination (Plates 9–13, fig. 1)
The corpus of translated literature on elemental divination was transmitted in Tibet through the Phug-pa, mTshur-phu and Byang-pa
schools. The first of these is sometimes referred to as the ‘accurate' (rnam-dag) or ‘unobscured' divinatory technique on account of the
more precise methodology employed by Khams-pa Khra-bo and his succcessors. Its lineage therefore descends from Khams-pa Khra-bo,
the last of the great translators, to 'Phan-yul Bheravajra, Mal-ze Glan (70), Se-ston Khri (71), Myos-kyi sTon-pa Byad (rgyad)- yod-cha
(72), rGya-ston Dir-ba (73), Zhang (74) and the aforementioned Khyung-nag Sak-dar (75).
Thereafter, it was handed down in succession through Phug-pa Mi-nyag rGyal-mtshan dPal-bzang (76), sNgags-
pa Lhun-grub dPa'-bo (77), Bla-ma mKhas-grub-pa Nor-bzang rGya-mtsho (78), Phug-pa Aryadeva (Lhun-grub rGya-mtsho) (79),35
mTshungs-med Sangs-rgyas Blo-gros (80), gTsug-lag dPal-mgon 'Phrin-las (81),96 bDe-legs Gar-dbang Phun-tshogs (82), Rigs-'dzin
gZhon-nu gDong-drug (83) and Zur-chen Chos-dbyings Rang-grol (84). The latter was an important rNying-ma-pa lineage-holder
(1604–1657) and teacher of Dalai Lama v, the combined spiritual and temporal ruler of Tibet.
The master gTsug-lag dPal-mgon 'Phrin-las also taught mKhas-mchog dPal-gyi Senge (85) and gYu-lo gNyags-
ban Na-ra-ba (86).
It was Dalai Lama V who transmitted the lineage ofZur-chen Chos-dbyings Rang-grol (87)37 to his regent Sangs-
rgyas rGya-mtsho (1655–1705), the author of the White Beryl.
ཙམ་དུ་གླུ་ཝུ༨yw། འད*taཔ《ཚ, ད ་ ༤༦༧ མ ན་
3,y ༣༤ པ།
70
སྒྱུས་ཀྱི་རྩྭ 4:༥ཕྱུད་༤) ༢ } སྤྱི སྙནོདོན་
༣། སྤྱོད༦ ︽)ནུ་རྫོང}:《ལྕqཚོ
72
73
74
75
76
77
མsiཁས་གྲུབ་པ་ཡིན། ཕྱི
3ཊ ངཛད།ཀློགfi
ཚུ (༧༤༽བུམ་ཡི།
།
ལྕེ་
་ ངུ སུ ས སྔ་ལr་དག་ད༩༢། ཨ་བྷུན་ཏུ་ཡི་ཨུ།ཙe
79
80
81
82
83
བྷཏྟི 《
83 ཡུམཝཱ་ ན་འ
ག
།
པའི་ ལུག་དེ་དུད་ཚདུལུ མུ །
ར》ར་ཕྱི ཨི Kཀ38:48 ཛྷq་དུས་:32:
85
ཤུ སུ
་དུG:[ཞུ་རྒྱུ།Q་ཞིབསུ །རྟ་བདུན་དབངུལྷ3.1:༌:་ ༢:
3/
86
88
39
ཟླ་། ༼༢། ་ཨ། } ། ཚེ༑ $[༤
ལ
(
༡༧ ངམ་རིང་$4༢༦ས་པ@g༨ 《རyསྐུ་༣ga-༣་ཚེ།
9ཛ3jrsg
91
ལ
ག་ན ་པ་ལ་གབཏཱཝུའ༦ ་
་ ། །
།
90
93
94
ང་
བྱ ་རེད* gད
།
95



59
The origins and transmission of elemental divination
According to another line of transmission, Phug-pa Āryadeva taught Dus-rams Don-grub Kun-dga' (88), he dGe-bsnyen bSod-nams
Tshe 'Dzin-pa (89), and he Slob-dpon bSod-nams Grags-pa (90). The latter taught Chos-rje Phun-tshogs dGe-dbang and mKhas-mchog
dPal-gyi Seng-ge; and thence the transmission was passed on to mKhas-dbang bKra-shis rTsis-rig-smra (91), IDum-po Don-grub
dBang-rgyal (92)98 and 'Dar-lo skad-gnyis sMra-ba (93) or Lu-go Bla-mkhyen Ngag-gi dbang-po (Vagendra) (94).99 The regent Sangs-
rgyas rGya-mtsho (95) also received the transmission from them.
Transmission through Sa-skya hierarchs (Plate 13, fig. 1)
Thereafter, the transmission from the regent Sangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho to councillor Kun-dga' – who commissioned the manuscript
artist bSod-nams dPal-'byor of rTse-gdong - is one imparted through the line of Sa-skya-pa hierarchs, who were richly endowed and evi-
dently well-positioned to commission these paintings. 40 This succession, which maintained the legacy of the regent, is through: Ngag-
dbang Kun-dga' Blo-gros (96), who lived circa 1717–1783 and held tenure as the thirty-second throne-holder of Sa-skya between 1729
and 1783; dBang-sdud sNying-po, also known as dPal-ldan Chos-skyong (97), whose dates are 1763–1806 and who held tenure as the
thirty-third throne-holder from 1783 to 1806; and E-vam bZang-po (98), a monk who also went by the name of Kun-dga' Phan-bde rGya-
mtsho (1766–1788).*. Unfortunately, nothing is known of the councillor Kun-dga' (99), beyond the fact that he was a venerable monk of
the Sa-skya-pa school.
བྱས་༢༢་༣ པ་ དང་དངོ༑ང། ངའང་ཏུན་པ་ Tཏུ་ཡེ་》+32 , །
RO
LES
(3-123 DPS
OTOKAR HAS
REARECKASUTSTKIM
98
96
97
99
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī pays homage to the transmission of elemental divination and the various aspects of the turtle-shell divinations in the
following introductory verses (Moonbeams, ff. 1a-2b)
Homage to the spiritual teacher, the venerable Mañughosa!
Homage to my spiritual teacher, the Great Treasure-Finder, 42
Who, having clearly discerned the qualitative abiding nature of reality,
Possesses enlightened activity through his quantitative dependent compassion,
For the sake of the spiritual and temporal well-being of all creatures. 48
Toffer thanks and homage to those who filled the vessel of my mind
With the nectar of the science of Indian astrology and Chinese divination:
The supreme rGyal-sras [bsTan-pa'i Nyi-ma],47
Zlum-po Chos-rje [Don-grub dBang-rgyal), 48
And rGya-ston [Karma Kun-mkhyen). 49
In order to dispel the dark delusions of living beings,
Homage to Mañjughoșa, the Conqueror's son in princely form,
[Seated] on the lotus anthers of knowledge and love, 44
Who is skilled in translating euphonic and eloquent melodies
Who are isolated from the sunlight of erudition,
The essential instructions of elemental divination
Resembling the humming of bees.
1 [now) send forth as most precious Moonbeams!
May all the following be victorious:
The saints who requested, emanated, received and maintained [this teaching).
Comprising four groups of four 45
Along with the master] Dahura [Nag-po),
The trio of translators and panditas, namely:
The scholars Rahu dMar-po and Zla-ba Nag-po,
And the translator Khams-pa Khra-bo,
Khyung [-nag Sāk-dar),
Phug-pa (Mi-nyag rGyal-mtshan dPal-bzang and Lhun-grub rGya-mtsho),
And the lineage-holders. 46
Elemental divination comprises two aspects:
The general structure of elemental divination,
And the particular or distinctive computational charts.
As for the first, there are explained in the tantras of divination science 50
To be five aspects of turtle-shell divination:
The turtle-shell divinations of the natural state, 51 of the material world, 52
of sentient existence, 53 of [symbolic] emanation, 54 and of exegesis, 55
Among these, the Teacher [Mañjughoșa) revealed this <divination] science
Symbolising the apparitional modes of the material world and its sentient existence,
By means of the illustrative divination turtle of emanation.



The hidden points of the turtle divination chart
SERE



62
The White Beryl
The divination turtle of sentient existence, which is depicted on Plate 2, fig. 5 (see p. 111), lies in a supine position, with its head facing
south, symbolising the fire element. The right side faces east, symbolising the wood element. The left side faces west, symbolising the
iron element. The tail faces north, symbolising the water element, while the four limbs face in the four intermediate directions, symbolis-
ing the earth element.' So Lo-chen Dharmaśrī states (Moonbeams, ff. 26–3a):
The essential meaning (of elemental divination]
Refers to the basic divination turtle of sentient existence,
Which is (depicted in a supine position,
With the head facing south, symbolising the fire element.
The right side faces east, symbolising the wood element
The left side faces west, symbolising the iron element.
The tail faces north, symbolising the water element.
The four limbs face in the four intermediate directions, symbolising the earth element.
All knowledge concerning the objects and applications of divination 2
Is acquired on the basis of this [divination turtle).
The five elements: basis of the object of divination
1. Wood (shing)
soz
Symbolised by a green tree and numerically represented by the number one, the wood element emerges naturally in an upright manner.
Its function is one of lightness and mobility, inherent in a diet of fruit and cooked vegetables, while within the body it is represented by
the blood-vessels, nerves and liver. It causes velar and guttural sounds to be articulated, and is characterised by bald-headedness and
goitre. In cases of ill-health an imbalance of wood is indicated by plague-causing spirits (gnyan) and malign goblins (the'u-brang), and by
paralysis of the nervous system. Socially, wood relates to the priestly class, the kingly type, and paternal uncles. It is located in the east of
the turtle divination chart, along with the trigram Zin, the tiger and hare signs, Jupiter and the six eastern constellations. If the hour of a
person's birth is governed by the wood destiny element, it is predicted that he or she will be an aristocrat, though possibly without heirs;
tall in stature, long-haired, and with enemies in the west and friends in the east.
2. Fire (me)
Symbolised by a red triangular flame and numerically represented by the number four, the fire element emerges naturally in a flickering
blazing manner. Its function is one of combustion, inherent in a diet of cooked meat, blood and the flesh of an animal's head, while within
the body it is represented by the metabolism and the heart. It causes dental sounds to be articulated, and is characterised by matted hair
or dreadlocks and swollen glands. In cases of ill-health an imbalance of fire is indicated by haunting spirits (bstan) and the ghosts of mur-
der victims (gre-bo), and by fevers and headaches. Socially, fire relates to the mercantile class, to women and children, or mothers with
daughters. It is located in the south of the turtle divination chart, along with the trigram Li, the horse and snake signs, the Sun and the six
southern constellations. If the hour of a person's birth is governed by the fire destiny element, it is predicted that he or she will be of a
Buddhist or potter's family background, but harassed due to a blood feud, short-tempered, virtuous, tall in stature, prone to many ups and
downs, conciliatory, and ruddy complexioned.
3. Earth (sa)
Symbolised by a yellow square and numerically represented by the number two, the earth element emerges naturally in a static manner.
Its function is one of heaviness and solidity, inherent in a diet of bread and the flesh of an animals limbs, while within the body it is repre-
sented by the muscle tissue and the spleen. It causes nasal sounds to be articulated, and is characterised by fringed hair and a decrepit pos-
ture. In cases of ill-health an imbalance of earth is indicated by spirit lords of the soil and demons of the countryside (yul-'dre), as well as by
lethargy and asphyxia. Socially, earth relates to the ruling class, to Buddhist monks, and to maternal ancestors or matters concerning land
and houses. It is located in the intermediate directions of the turtle divination chart, along with the trigrams Khon, Khen, Gin and Zon, the
ox, sheep, dog and dragon signs, Saturn and the four intermediate constellations. If the hour of a person's birth is governed by the earth
destiny element, it is predicted that he or she will be of a mantrin or nun's family, but the locality will be afflicted by spirit lords of the soil.
4. Iron (Icags)
Symbolised by a white semi-circle or blade and numerically represented by the number five, the iron element emerges naturally with
sharp edges. Its function is one of sharpness or incision, inherent in a diet of dairy products and flesh from an animal's ribs, while within
the body it is represented by the bone tissue and the lungs. It causes vocalic sounds to be articulated, and is characterised by shaven heads
and moles. In cases of ill-health an imbalance of iron is indicated by king spirits (rgyal-po) and Pehar, as well as by colic and bone ailments.
Socially, iron relates to the outcasts, to children, maternal relatives and protector deities. It is located in the west of the turtle divination
chart, along with the trigram Dva, the bird and monkey signs, Venus and the six western constellations. If the hour of a person's birth is
governed by the iron destiny element, it is predicted that he or she will be a fair-complexioned villager in whose family a blood feud has
occurred, noisy, tall and unrestrained in speech.
5. Water (chu)
Symbolised by a blue circle and numerically represented by the number three, the water element emerges naturally in a flowing manner.
Its function is one of mollification, inherent in a diet of liquid refreshments including wine and water, while within the body it is repre-
sented by the blood, serum and kidneys. It causes labial sounds to be articulated, and is characterised by hair on the occiput and a cleft
palate. In cases of ill-health an imbalance of water is indicated by serpentine spirits (nāga) and imprecatory goddesses (ma-mo), as well as
by cold diseases and ailments of the lower part of the body. Socially, water relates to the labouring classes, to Bon-po priests, sisters and
female in-laws. It is located in the north of the turtle divination chart, along with the trigram Kham, the mouse and pig signs, Moon,
Mercury and the six northern constellations. If the hour of a person's birth is governed by the water destiny element, it is predicted that he
or she will be of dark complexion, of a Bon-po or village family background, loud-voiced, whimsical, and lacking in reliable supporters.3



63
The hidden points of the turtle divination chart
The relationships of identity, mother, son, enemy and friend
These five material elements ("byung-ba lnga), so-named because they are said to be ‘naturally emerging' (rang-bzhin 'byung), are the basis
of the object of divination because their interaction forms specific types of productive and destructive relationship within the cycle known
as ‘mother-son and enemy-friend' (ma-bu dgra-grogs). Among them, water is the mother of wood, and iron is the mother of water, earth is
the mother of iron, fire is the mother of earth, and wood is the mother of fire. Conversely, fire is the son of wood, earth is the son of fire,
iron is the son of earth, water is the son of iron, and wood is the son of water. In addition, iron is the enemy of wood, fire is the enemy of
iron, water is the enemy of fire, earth the enemy of water, and wood is the enemy of earth. Earth is the friend of wood, water is the friend of
earth, fire is the friend of water, iron is the friend of fire, and wood is the friend of iron.* As stated above, these relationships are on a slid-
ing scale of positive-negative values with the mother’-relationship at the top end and the enemy’-relationship at the low end of the scale.
When the elemental relationships are unagitated, well-being is conferred on the subject. The sufferings of ill-
health and death ensue, however, when they are agitated. Divination is therefore a means by which these positive or negative relation-
ships may be recognised, and remedial measures applied. As Lo-chen Dharmaśrī states (Moonbeams, ff. 3a-4a):
The bases of the object of divination are the five elements,
The elements are also explained according to five aspects:
Wood, fire, earth, iron, and water,
Essence, definition, classification, characteristic and function
Which enter into mother-son and enemy-friend relationships:
Among these, the essence is that when the elements are
investigated,
Water is the mother of wood, and iron is the mother of water.
They are not existent as external matter.
Earth is the mother of iron, fire is the mother of earth,
This is why they are defined as 'naturally emerging'
And wood is the mother of fire.
The classification has five aspects,
And seven or eight when space, air and mountain are added."
Fire is the son of wood, and earth is the son of fire,
The characteristics of the five elements, beginning with wood, are
Iron is the son of earth, water is the son of iron,
respectively:
And wood is the son of water.
Movement (wood), combustibility (fire), solidity (earth), incision (iron).
and moisture (water)
Iron is the enemy of wood, and fire is the enemy of iron.
The functions are to conter well-being, when unagitated,
Water is the enemy of fire, earth the enemy of water,
And to provoke the sufferings of ill-health and death when agitated.
And wood is the enemy of earth
Therefore, the body which is an aggregate of these elements
Is influenced by ailments, primordial bewitchers, and the four
adversarial signs, 9
Earth is the friend of wood and water is the friend of earth
Fire is the friend of water, iron is the friend of fire,
Which are all produced by and compounded of disruptive thoughts, 10
And wood is the friend of iron.
These functions take effect owing to the emergence
Of all the [diverse] joys and sorrows. 11.
This is the computational sequence of the elements,
Therefore, this divination is precious because it dispels those
And (these four types of relationship) are applied
[influences)
To all other computational sequences in general. 6
The application of divination science
Elemental divination may conform to the natural order of the elements, according to which wood, fire, earth, iron and water are all recog-
nised to be uncompounded and of the nature of space; or else it may be undertaken in the context of the bewildered misconception of sen-
tient beings, according to which distinctions are made between the discrete elements, the apparent sense-objects formed by them, the
intellect which analyses the elemental relationships, and the mind which apprehends positive and negative consequences. These are
known as the four primary ‘hidden points of divination' (gab-rtse)."
Among them, the discrete elements, which are depicted on Plate 1, fig. 3, have external, internal and secret
classifications. Thus, wood is an external element, internally identified with the blood vessels and nerves and secretly with the liver and
gall bladder. Fire is an external element, internally identified with the metabolism and secretly with the heart and small intestine. Earth
is an external element, internally identified with the flesh and secretly with the spleen and the stomach. Iron is an external element, inter-
nally identified with the bones and secretly with the lungs and the large intestine. Lastly, water is an external element, internally
identified with the blood or serum and secretly with the kidneys and the urinary bladder.
ཕྱི་འབྱུང།
གསང་འབྱུང།
Plate 1, fig. 3
Plate 1, fig. 3 (Msi: ff. 3–4): The elements or basis of the calculation
External elements (phyi 'byung
Internal elements (nang 'byung
Secret elements (gsang 'byung
wood
channels
liver
water
blood/serum
kidneys
iron
bones
l ungs
earth
flesh
spleen
fire
metabolism
heart



64
The White Beryl
In the words of Lo-chen Dharmaśrī (Moonbeams, f. 4a/b):
The practical science of divination has two aspects:
The former, the basis of the divination, entails four factors:
Natural basis and bewildering appearances.
Discrete elements, apparent sense-objects,
As for the divination science of natural basis: 13
Phenomenal existence appears as the five elements;
But all of these are (recognised to be of the nature of space,
Without extremes or centre, and uncompounded. 14
Acting intellect, and apprehending mind.
These are known as the [four primary] 'hidden points' of divination.
[Among them), the discrete (elements) are determined
According to their [external, internal and secret] classifications; 17
Apparent objects are known 18 as the diversely appearing sense-objects;
The acting intellect is that which analyses and ponders
The mutual relationships between those (elements and sense objects); 19
[By contrast), the divination science of bewildering appearances,
Which is grounded in fundamental ignorance, 15
Has two aspects: the basis of this divination and the divination
And the (apprehending) mind is that which grasps
techniques. 16
Their negative and positive attributes.
The nine divination techniques
When divinations are undertaken in the context of these four hidden points, the diviner should refer to the elaborate turtle divination
chart which comprises nine basic techniques for calculating the relationships formed by the elements. Accordingly, calculations may be
based on: the five constitutional types (rus-khams-lnga); the twelve- or sixty-year cycle (lo bcu-gnyis/ lo drug-bcu); the nine numeric squares
(sme-ba dgu); the eight trigrams (spar-kha brgyad); the twelve months (zla-ba bcu-gnyis); the thirty lunar days of the month (zhag sum-bcu);
the twelve two-hour periods of the day (dus-tshod bcu-gnyis); the eight planets representing the weekdays (bza'-drgyad); or the twenty-
eight constellations (rgyu-skar nyer-brgyad). Moonbeams describes these in detail, closely following the White Beryl treatise, but changing
the order so that the fifth and sixth topics (numeric squares and trigrams) are placed before the months, days and hours (Moonbeams, f. 4b):
The divination techniques, when subsumed, have nine aspects:
Constitutional types, years, numeric squares, trigrams,
Months, days, hours, planets and constellations.
The following description of the nine techniques is presented in the sequence suggested by Sangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho in his White Beryl
treatise, since our manuscript is based directly upon that text.
1. Constitutional types
Sentient beings comprise five constitutional types (rus-khams lnga), which are known in Tibetan by their original transliterated Chinese
terms conjoined with the appropriate element: wood (keg-shing), fire (ji-me), earth (kung-sa), iron (gshang-lcags) and water ('u-chu). These
have their distinctive functions within the organism. For example, in terms of speech, wood (keg-shing) articulates velar or guttural
sounds; fire (ji-me) articulates dental sounds; earth (kungs-sa) articulates nasal sounds, gathering air within the abdomen; iron (gshang-
lcags) articulates vocalic sounds; while water ('u-chu) articulates labial sounds.
Individual persons or subjects of divination are also generally recognised as belonging to one or other of these
five constitutional types.20 The main point here is that it is important for the diviner to ascertain which years among those of the twelve-
year cycle are significant in the case of a specific constitutional type. As illustrated on Plate 1, fig. 4, each constitutional type is considered
to have its years of greater penalty (chad-chen-gyi lo) and lesser penalty (chad-chung-gi lo), as well as those forming identity or destiny
relationships (dbang-lo), mother-relationships (ma-lo), son-relationships (bu-lo), friend-relationships (grogs-lo) and enemy-relationships
(dgra-lo). For example, in the case of a wood constitutional type, the tiger and hare years are those of identity or destiny (dbang-lo), the
mouse and pig years are those in a mother-relationship (ma-lo), the horse and snake years are those in a son-relationship (bu-lo), the dog
and dragon years are those in a friend-relationship (grogs-lo), the bird and monkey years are those in an enemy-relationship (dgra-lo), the
sheep year is the one of greater penalty (chad-chen), and the ox year the one of lesser penalty (chad-chung). In addition each type is recog-
nised to have a specific planet of destiny (dbang-gza) and constellation of destiny (dbang-skar), which in the case of the wood constitu-
tional type are respectively Jupiter and the six eastern constellations.
SEORAHAN
138609012
BOKSLAS
int
དབངལ། སྟག ས|
བུ་ལ་སྦྲུལ རྟ།
གྲོགས་ལོད གང ལུག ཁྱི
ངེགྲ་དབྱསྦེ་
འབྲག།། Verano
ག་ ཨིས། སྦྲུལ། གླིང་ལྷགོ བྱ། སྤྱི།།
སྒྲོལ། 6 ཟླ་ལྷག བྱ། སྦེ་ གྱི ་
མདའཁྲུག་ལུག བྱ། གླེ། བྱི་ཕག། སྟག། ཡིས།
31 5w1
ཐག། སྦག། ཡས། སྔལ། རྟགླིངྒའབགཝུག
Plate 1, fig. 4



65
The hidden points of the turtle divination chart
Plate 1, fig. 4 (Ms Tiff. 4-5): Constitutional types and their relationships with the years
wood
fire
earth
iron
water
(keg-shing)
(ji-me)
(kung-sa)
(gshang-Icags)
(u chư)
sheep
dog
dragon
Ox
dragon
ox
dragon
dog
sheep
dog
mouse; pig
tiger, hare
snake; horse
ox; dog; sheep; dragon
bird; monkey
Forms of the five constitutional types
(rus-chen Inga'i gzugs)
Years of great penalty (chad-chen-gyi lo)
Years of lesser penalty (chad-chung-gi-lo)
Mother-relationship years (ma-lo)
Destiny years (dbang-lo)
Son-relationship years (bu-lo)
Friend-relationship years (grogs-lo)
Enemy-relationship years (dgra-lo)
Planet of destiny (dbang-gzag21
Constellations of destiny (dbang-skar)
tiger; hare
snake; horse
ox; dog; sheep; dragon
bird; monkey
mouse; pig
snake; horse
ox; dog; sheep; dragon
bird; monkey
mouse; pig
tiger; hare
ox; dog; sheep; dragon
bird; monkey
mouse; pig
tiger; hare
snake; horse
bird; monkey
mouse; pig
tiger; hare
snake; horse
ox; dog; sheep; dragon
Jupiter
Mars
Saturn
Venus
Mercury
six eastern constellations
six southern constellations
four intermediate constellations
six western constellations
six northern constellations
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī writes (Moonbeams, ff. 4b-5a):
First, as for the constitutional types:
If it coincides with a tiger or hare year, the year is one of [identity or destiny
The five constitutional types are those of wood, fire, earth, iron and water.
The mouse and pig (years) are in a mother relationship,
These, too, are recognised to have their distinctive (attributes]:
While the horse and snake (years) are in a son-relationship.
It is said that wood articulates velar or guttural sounds;
The dog and dragon (years) are in a friend-relationship,
Fire articulates dental sounds, earth articulates nasal sounds,
Iron articulates vocalic sounds, and water labial sounds.
While the bird and monkey (years) are in an enemy-relationship.
The sheep (year) is one of greater penalty (chad-chen): 22
And the ox [year] one of lesser penalty (chad-chung). 23
Harmonious relationships are formed through the conjunction of the
The planet of destiny is Jupiter;
[various] year-signs and those constitutional types.
And the constellations of destiny are the six eastern constellations,
For example, in the case of a person with a wood constitution:
Such calculations should be applied to all (of the five constitutional types). 24
Below Detail of Plate 2, fig. 5 (see p. 111), showing the constellations,
planet, elemental goddess and Directional Protector of the East
URSES
30
37



66
The White Beryl
2. Years
The twe
The twelve-year cycle (lo-'gros bcu-gnyis) accords with the sequence: mouse, ox, tiger, hare, dragon, snake, horse, sheep, monkey, bird,
dog and pig, each of which has its distinctive etymological derivation.25 The mouse year stands at the head of the cycle since it was in a
wood mouse year that Mañjughosa is traditionally said to have expounded elemental divination for the first time, and since the foremost
spirit lord of the soil, King The-se, 26 was located in the lower north direction, coinciding with the mouse. The mouse, tiger, dragon,
horse, monkey and dog years are considered male, while those of the ox, hare, snake, sheep, bird and pig are female. As depicted on Plate
2, fig. 4, the twelve year-signs are located in different directions of the turtle divination chart, corresponding to their associated element:
the tiger and hare to the east, the snake and horse to the south, the monkey and bird to the west, the pig and mouse to the north, and the
dragon, sheep, dog and ox in the four intermediate directions. These correspondences may be tabulated as shown below (Plate 2, fig. 4).
The cardinal directions accord with the didactic scheeme outlined on pp. 49 and 53. For the position of the twelve animals in the context
of the turtle chart as a whole, see p.111 (nos 1-12 on the schematic illustration).
CCCC
Acess
Plate 2, fig. 4 (Ms 1: ff. 7-11): Location of the twelve animals on the divination turtle
ON
Dragon
Snake
Horse
Sheep
male
female
male
female
south-east
south-south-east
south-south-west
south-west
Hare
Monkey
female
male
east-south-east
west-south-west
Tiger
Bird
male
female
east-north-east
west-north-west
Ох
Mouse
Pig
Dog
female
male
female
male
north-east
north-north-east
north-north-west
north-west
HET
NE
Plate 2, fig. 4
The sexagenary cycle
The twelve-year cycle is extended into a sixty-year or sexagenary cycle (lo-skor drug-cu) when each of the twelve animal signs is com-
bined with the five destiny elements (dbang-thang lnga). 27 The earliest Chinese sexagenary cycle (ganzhı) appears to have been formed by
the combination of the celestial trunks and the five elements, the first such cycle commencing in the year 2697 BC.28 The Tibetan sexage-
nary cycle, by contrast, was originally derived from the sexagenary Jupiter cycle expounded in the Tantra of the Wheel of Time
(Kālacakratantra), according to which each of the sixty years has its own distinctive Sanskrit name.29 While the sixty-second Chinese
cycle commenced in the year 1024, the first Tibetan cycle began in 1027 with the first year of a new Indian cycle, termed Prabhava.
Subsequently, the Chinese method, which had previously been employed in Tibet for the calculation of a twelve-year cycle, was assimi-
lated to the Indian cycle, utilising the combination of animal signs and destiny elements. The correspondences between the years of the
sexagenary cycle and the Western calendar may be tabulated as shown in chart 2.1.30



67
The hidden points of the turtle divination chart
2.1 Correspondences between the sexagenary year and the Western calendar
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises the twelve- and sixty-year cycles
in the following verses (Moonbeams, f. 5a/b):
Divinatory year
fire hare
Astrological year
rab-byung
rnam-byung
earth dragon
Secondly, concerning the twelve-year cycle (10-'gros bcu-gnyis):
When [Mañughoṣa) first taught elemental divination,
earth snake
dkar-po
The spirit lord of the soil The-se was located in the north-north-east direction,
iron horse
rab-myos
Coinciding with the mouse [year],
iron sheep
skyes-bdag
For which reason the mouse year was placed at the beginning,
water monkey
ang-gir
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
Followed in succession by those of the ox, tiger, hare, dragon, snake,
water bird
dpal-gdong
horse, sheep, monkey, bird, dog and pig.
wood dog
dngos-po
wood pig
sna-tshod-Idan
When the years are classified according to male and female years:
fire mouse
'dzin-byed
Those of the mouse, tiger, dragon, horse, monkey and dog are male,
fire ox
dbang-phyug
And those of the ox, hare, snake, sheep, bird and pig are female. 31
earth tiger
'bru mang-po
Each of these has five destiny elements (dbang-thang Inga),
earth hare
myos-Idan
1999
So that, when further subdivided, there is a sixty-year cycle.
iron dragon
ram-gnon
iron snake
gru-mchog
2000
2001
2002
2003
As for the directions in which they are located:
sna-tshogs
water horse
water sheep
The tiger is in the east-north-east, the hare in the east-south-east,
nyi-ma
And the dragon in the south-east.
wood monkey
nyi-grol-che
2004
The snake is in the south-south-east, the horse in the south-south-west,
wood bird
sa-skyong
2005
And the sheep in the south-west.
fire dog
mi-zad
The monkey is in the west-south-west, the bird in the west-north-west,
fire pig
thams-cad 'dul
And the dog in the north-west.
earth mouse
kun-'dzin
The pig is in the north-north-west, the mouse in the north-north-east,
earth ox
gal-ba
And the ox in the north-east. 32
iron tiger
rnam-gyur
iron hare
bong-bu
water dragon
dga'-ba
water snake
rnam-rgyal
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
wood horse
rgyal-ba
wood sheep
myos-byed
fire monkey
Corresponding Western years (sexagenary cycles I-XVII)
1027 1087 1147 1207 1267 1327 1387 1447 1507 1567 1627 1687 1747 1807 1867 1927
1028 1088 1148 1208 1268 1328 1388 1448 1508 1568 1628 1688 1748 1808 1868 1928
1029 1089 11491209 1269132913891449 1509 1569 1629168917491809 18691929
1030 1090 1150 1210 1270 1330 1390 1450 1510 1570 1630 1690 1750 1810 1870 1930
1031 1091 1151 1211 1271 1331 1391 1451 1511 1571 1631 1691 1751 1811 1871 1931
1032 1092 1152 1212 1272 1332 1392 1452 1512 1572 1632 1692 1752 1812 1872 1932
1033 1093 1153 1213 1273 1333 1393 1453 1513 1573 1633 1693 1753 1813 1873 1933
1034 1094 1154 1214 1274 1334 1394 1454 1514 1574 1634 1694 1754 1814 1874 1934
1035 1095 1155 1215 1275 1335 1395 1455 1515 1575 1635 1695 1755 1815 1875 1935
1036 1096 1156 1216 1276 1336 1396 1456 1516 1576 1636 1696 1756 1816 1876 1936
1037 1097 1157 1217 1277 1337 1397 1457 1517 1577 1637 1697 1757 1817 1877 1937
1038 1098 1158 1218 1278 1338 1398 1458 1518 1578 1638 1698 1758 1818 1978 1938
1039 1099 1159 1219 12791339139914591519157916391699 1759 1819 1879 1939
1040 1100 1160 1220 1280 1340 1400 1460 1520 1580 1640 1700 1760 1820 1880 1940
1041 1101 1161 1221 1281 1341 1401 1461 1521 1581 1641 1701 1761 1821 1881 1941
1042 1102 1162 1222 1282 1342 1402 1462 1522 1582 1642 1702 1762 1822 1882 1942
1043 1103 1163 1223 1283 1343 1403 1463 1523 1583 1643 1703 1763 1823 1883 1943
1044 1104 1164 1224 1284 1344 1404 1464 1524 1584 1644 1704 1764 1824 1884 1944
1045 1105 1165 1225 1285 1345 1405 1465 1525 1585 1645 1705 1765 1825 1886 1945
1046 1106 1166 1226 1286 1346 1406 1466 1526 1586 1646 1706 1 766 1826 1886 1946
1047 1107 1167 1227 1287 1347 1407 1467 1527 1587 1647 1707 1767 1827 1887 1947
1048 1108 1168 1228 1288 1348 1408 1468 1528 1588 1648 1708 1768 1828 1888 1948
104911091169 1229 128913491409146915291589 1649 1709 1769 1829 1889 1949
1050 1110 1170 1230 1290 1350 1410 1470 1530 1590 1650 1710 1770 1830 1890 1950
1051 1111 1171 1231 1291 13511411 1471 1531 1591 1651 1711 1771 1831 1891 1951
1052 1112 1172 1232 1292 13521412 1472 1532 1592 1652 1712 1771 1832 1892 1952
1053 1113 1173 1233 1293 1253 1413 1473 1533 1593 1653 1713 1773 1833 1893 1953
1054 1114 1174 1234 1294 13541414 1474 1534 1594 1654 1714 1774 1834 1894 1954
1055 1115 1175 1235 1295 13551415 1475 1535 1595 1655 1715 1775 1835 1895 1955
1056 1116 1176 1236 1296 1356 1416 1476 1536 1596 1656 1716 1776 1836 1896 1956
1057 1117 1177 1237 1297 1357 1417 1477 1537 1597 1657 1717 1777 1837 1897 1957
1058 1118 1178 1238 1298 1358 1418 1478 1538 1598 1658 1718 1778 1838 1898 1958
10591119 117912391299 135914191479153915991659 1719 1779 1839 1899 1959
1060 1120 1180 1240 1300 1360 1420 1480 1540 1600 1660 1720 1780 1840 1900 1960
1061 1121 1181 1241 1301 1361 1421 1481 1541 1601 1661 1721 1781 18411901 1961
1062 1122 1182 1242 1302 1362 1422 1482 1542 1602 1662 1722 1782 1842 1902 1962
1063 1123 1183 1243 1303 1363 1423 1483 1543 1603 1663 1723 1783 1843 1903 1963
1064 1124 1184 1244 1304 1364 1424 1484 1544 1604 1664 1724 1784 1844 1904 1964
1065 1125 1185 1245 1305 1365 1425 1485 1545 1605 1665 1725 1785 1845 1905 1965
1066 1126 1186 1246 1306 1366 1426 1486 1546 1606 1666 1726 1786 1846 1906 1966
1067 1127 1187 1247 1307 1367 1427 1487 1547 1607 1667 1727 1787 1947 1907 1967
1068 1128 1188 1248 1308 1368 1428 1488 1548 1608 1668 1728 1788 1848 1908 1968
10691129 1189 1249 1309 136914291489154916091669 1729 1789 1849 1909 1969
1070 1130 1190 1250 1310 1370 1430 1490 1550 1610 1670 1730 1790 1850 1910 1970
1071 1131 1191 1251 1311 1371 1431 1491 1551 1611 1671 1731 1791 1851 1911 1971
1072 1132 1192 1252 1312 1372 1432 1492 1552 1612 1672 1732 1791 1852 1912 1972
1073 1133 1193 1253 1313 1373 1433 1493 1553 1613 1673 1733 1793 1853 1913 1973
1074 1134 1194 1254 1314 1374 1434 1494 1554 1614 1674 1734 1794 1854 1914 1974
1075 1135 1195 1255 1315 1375 1435 1495 1555 1615 1675 1735 1795 1855 1915 1975
1076 1136 1196 1256 1316 1376 1436 1496 1556 1616 1676 1736 1796 1856 1916 1976
1077 1137 1197 1257 1317 1377 1437 1497 1557 1617 1677 1737 1797 1857 1917 1977
1078 1138 1198 1258 1318 1378 1438 1498 1558 1618 1678 1738 1798 1858 1918 1978
1079 1139 1199 1259 13191379 1439149915591619 1679 1739 1799 1859 1919 1979
1080 1140 1200 1260 1320 1380 1440 1500 1560 1620 1680 1740 1800 1860 1920 1980
1081 1141 1201 1261 1321 1381 1441 1501 1561 1621 1681 1741 1801 18611921 1981
108211421202 1262 1322 1382 1442 1502 1561 1622 1682 1742 1802 1862 1922 1982
1083 1143 1203 1263 1323 1383 1443 1503 1563 1623 1683 1743 1803 1863 1923 1983
1084 1144 1204 1264 1324 1384 1444 1504 1564 1624 1684 1744 1804 1864 1924 1984
1085 1145 1205 1265 1325 1385 1445 1505 1565 1625 1685 1745 1805 1865 1925 1985
1086 1146 1206 1266 326 1386 1446 1506 1566 1626 1686 1746 1806 1866 1926 1986
gdong-ngan
fire bird
gser-'chang
earth dog
ram-'phyang
earth pig
'gyur-byed
iron mouse
kun-Idan
iron ox
'phar-ba
2021
2022
water tiger
dge-byed
water hare
mdzes-byed
wood dragon
khro-mo
2023
2024
2025
wood snake
sna-tshogs dbyig
fire horse
zil-gnon
2026
fire sheep
sprelu
phur-bu
earth monkey
earth bird
zhi-ba
iron dog
thun-mong
iron pig
gal-byed
water mouse
yong-'dzin
water ox
bag-med
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
2039
2040
wood tiger
kun-dga'
wood hare
srin-bu
fire dragon
me
fire snake
dmar-ser-can
dus-kyi pho-nya
don-grub
earth horse
earth sheep
iron monkey
iron bird
drag-po
blo-ngan
2041
water dog
rnga-chen
water pig
khrag-skyug
wood mouse
mig-dmar
2042
2043
2044
2045
2046
wood ox
khro-bo
fire tiger
zad-pa



68
The White Beryl
Four elemental aspects of the sexagenary cycle
In the Tibetan system of elemental divination, each of the years of the sexagenary cycle has four distinct elemental aspects, known as
vitality (srog), body (lus), destiny (dbang-thang) and luck (klung-rta). On Plates 3–8, fig. 2, and 16–22, fig. 1,93 these are depicted according
to the symbolism of the sPor-thang tradition (spor-thang brda-mtshon ri-mo) – as the White Beryl, f. 158a, clearly states. The vitality ele-
ment (srog) of a given year sign is symbolised by the colour of the animal's head, the destiny element (dbang-thang) by the colour of the
animal's clothing, the luck aspect (klung-rta) by the colour of the belt, and the actual element (khams-nyid) indicative of luck by the form
and colour of the mat. The thirty pairs of body elements (lus-kyi kha-srog sum-cu), sometimes identified with the colour of the animals tur-
ban, are here depicted directly above their corresponding animals in symbolic forms, following the illustrative basis of the sGang-sgril
tradition as outlined in White Beryl, f. 156 a/b.34 Lo-chen Dharmaśrī writes (Moonbeams, f. 5b):
Each of these [animal year signs) has four elemental aspects:
Vitality, body, destiny and luck.
a) Vitality elemental aspect of the years The vitality (srog) is the life-essence present in the heart of corporeal beings from the moment of birth
until the moment of death. When the vitality is weak, ritual ransom (srog bslu-ba) may be performed to restore its potency. The vitality
element corresponding to a given year-sign is the very element governing the natural location of the corresponding animal. Thus, wood,
governing the eastern direction, is the vitality element of the tiger and hare years; fire, governing the south, is the vitality element of the
horse and snake years; iron, governing the west, is the vitality element of the bird and monkey years; water, governing the north, is the
vitality element of the mouse and pig years; while earth, governing the intermediate directions, is the vitality element of the ox, sheep,
dog and dragon years.
There are technical Chinese terms for the various relationships formed between the destiny elements and
those vitality elements, as illustrated on Plate 1, fig. 5. Thus, when the destiny element forms an identity-relationship with the
vitality element, the year is known in Tibetan transliteration as kha-yan; when it forms a mother-relationship with the vitality element,
the year is known as khong-nong, when it forms a son-relationship with the vitality element, the year is known as se-zhig, when it forms a
friend-relationship with the vitality element, the year is called kha-ral; and when it forms an enemy-relationship with the vitality ele-
ment, the year is called 'dun-khur. In addition, the element forming a mother-relationship with the vitality element may also be known as
the ‘life-spirit (bla).95 For example, if the present year is that of the mouse or pig, it is known as a kha-yan year when the destiny element is
also water, but as a khong-nong year when the destiny element is iron, a se-zhig year when the destiny element is wood, or a kha-ral year
when the destiny element is fire. In the tabular charts corresponding to Plates 3–8, fig. 2 (see pp. 70–87) this information has been added
for each of the sixty years in turn.
Plate 1, fig. 5
gམ་ལའི་སེ།
ག་ངད་དུ་བལྟ་བ།
ཁརྟག་ཁ་ན 1:
སོག་པར་དབང་ཐང་
སང་པ་ཁོང་ནི།
སྲོག་གི་པར་དབང་
ཨང་བ་ས་ཞིག
སོག་གི་དུག་དྲ་ད་ཕུང་ཐུག
NA
L
V
ak
NTS
ga
ST
ལྕགས།
ལྕགོས
tiger; hare
snake; horse
monkey; bird
ox; sheep; dog; dragon
wood
fire
iron
earth
wood
fire
iron
earth
Plate 1, fig. 5 (Ms I. ff. 4-5): Vitality elements of the twelve year-signs and destiny elements in relationship with them
animal indictative of the vitality of the present year (gnam-lo'i srog)
mouse; pig
vitality element of the present year36
water
destiny element in identity-relationship with the vitality (kha-yan)
water
destiny element in mother-relationship with the vitality (khong-nong)
iron
destiny element in son-relationship with the vitality (se-zhig)
wood
destiny element in enemy-relationship with the vitality ('dun-khur)
earth
destiny element in friend-relationship with the vitality (kha-rah
water
wood
earth
fire
fire
earth
water
iron
iron
water
fire
wood
fire
earth
iron
wood
water
Lo-chen Dharmasrī summarises this topic as follows (Moonbeams, f. 5b):
The vitality element [of the year-signs) refers to the elements
The (element in a) mother-relationship with the vitality (element]
When the destiny element enters into a friend-relationship
Associated with their respective locations:
is known as 'life-spirit' (bla).
with the vitality], it is called kha-ral,
When the vitality and destiny elements form an identity-relationship,
And when the destiny element enters into an enemy-relationship
Wood (east) is the vitality of the tiger and hare [years),
Fire (south) is that of the horse and snake (years),
The year is called kha-yan,
[with the vitality], it is called 'dun-khur.
Iron (west] is that of the bird and monkey [years),
But when the destiny element enters into a mother-relationship
Water (north) is that of the mouse and pig [years),
with the vitality, the year is called khong-nong.
And earth [intermediate) is the vitality of the ox, sheep, dog and
When the destiny element enters into a son-relationship
dragon [years]
[with the vitality], it is called se-zhig,



69
The hidden points of the turtle divination chart
b) Body elemental aspect of the years The body element (lus), which determines physical health, is calculated from the Kham (water) trigram
in the case of persons born in the tiger, hare, bird or monkey year. It is calculated from the Zin (wood) trigram in the case of persons born
in the ox, sheep, horse or mouse years; and from the Dva (iron) trigram in the case of those born in the dog, dragon, pig or snake years.37
It is important to note that though the animal sign determines the trigram from which the count begins, that sector is provisionally des-
ignated as “iron' (lcags) for the sake of the count, whatever the element normally associated with the trigram may be. For example, in the
case of one born in the iron tiger year, the count begins from the Kham (water) trigram in the north, but this trigram is designated as
‘iron' for the sake of the count. 98 Then, counting through the sequence: iron, water, fire, earth and wood, one finds the body element in the
sector corresponding to that of the destiny element, i.e. in the example of a subject born in the iron tiger year, the body element is wood,
coinciding with sector normally associated with the destiny element iron. 99 In addition, the sixty years of the cycle form thirty neigh-
bouring pairs, which share an identical body element, for which reason they are known as the thirty kha-srogʻ.40
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises the body elemental aspect as follows (Moonbeams, ff. 5b6a):
Then, the key to the aspect of body (lus) is as follows:
(Verbally), one then enumerates [the elements in the sequence)
[The element indicative of the body aspect]
Iron, water, fire, earth and wood.
The destiny and body (elements) are both found in corresponding sectors.
is calculated from the Kham (water) trigram
In the case of those born in the tiger, hare, bird, and monkey (years);
It is calculated from the Zin (wood) trigram
Since neighbouring pairs among the sixty years of the cycle
In the case of [those born in the ox, sheep, horse, and mouse (years);
Have an identical body element,
And it is calculated from the Dva (iron) trigram
[These pairs) are collectively known as the 'thirty kha srog',
In the case of those born in the dog, dragon, pig, and snake (years).
c) Destiny elemental aspect of the years The destiny element (dbang-thang) governs personal spheres of influence, wealth, property, food,
clothing and descendants, and is the element specifically designated nowadays when the years form a sexagenary cycle. It is important to
bear in mind, however, that the term 'destiny', when used to render dbang-thang in the context of this system of divination – which is
grounded in Buddhism - is to be equated with the ripening effect of evolutionary past actions (karma) and not with an irreversible prede-
termined fate. As for its calculation, whenever a male year begins, the destiny element has an identity-relationship in the case of persons
aged one and ten.*' It has a mother-relationship in the case of those aged two and three, 42 an enemy-relationship in the case of those aged
four and five,43 a friend-relationship in the case of those aged six and seven, 44 and a son-relationship in the case of those aged eight and
nine.45 Conversely, whenever a female year begins, the destiny element has an identity-relationship in the case of persons aged one and
two, a mother-relationship in the case of those aged three and four, an enemy-relationship in the case of those aged five and six, a friend-
relationship in the case of those aged seven and eight, and a son-relationship in the case of those aged nine and ten.
Each neighbouring pair of male and female year signs among the sixty years of the cycle share an identical des-
tiny element, and these are numbered sequentially in the sequence wood, fire, earth, iron, water, so that the thirty pairs are collectively
known as the thirty consecutive numbers' (bu-'ded sum-cu). 46
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises the destiny aspect as follows (Moonbeams, f. 6a):
Now, to disclose the key to the destiny (elements]:
And it has a son-relationship in the case of those aged eight and nine.
Since (neighbouring] pairs of male and female [year-signs]
Whenever a male year begins, it should be known that
Whenever a female year begins:
among the sixty years of the cycle
[The destiny element has an identity-relationship
[The destiny element has an identity relationship in the case of
Share the same destiny (element),
These (pairs of destiny elements) are also known
In the case of those aged one and ten.
those aged one and two,
It has a mother relationship in the case of those aged two and three,
A mother-relationship in the case of those aged three and four,
As the 'thirty consecutive numbers',
It has an enemy-relationship in the case of those aged four and five,
An enemy-relationship in the case of those aged five and six,
It has a friend-relationship in the case of those aged six and seven,
A friend-relationship in the case of those aged seven and eight,
And a son-relationship in the case of those aged nine and ten.
d) Luck elemental aspect of the years The luck element (klung-rta)*7 is suggestive of good fortune and good reputation. Its calculation
depends on the animal sign corresponding to the numeric square indicative of the subject's vitality (srog-gi sme-ba) 48 combined with a
specific element. For example, the monkey sign corresponding to the numeric square of vitality combined with the iron element form the
luck aspect of persons born in the tiger, horse or dog years. The tiger sign corresponding to the numeric square of vitality combined with
the wood element form the luck aspect of persons born in the mouse, dragon or monkey years. The pig sign corresponding to the numeric
square of vitality combined with the water element form the luck aspect of persons born in the bird, ox or snake years, while the snake
sign corresponding to the numeric square of vitality combined with the fire element form the luck aspect of those born in the pig, sheep or
hare years. There is no luck aspect corresponding to the earth element.
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises the luck elemental aspect as follows (Moonbeams, f. 6a/b):
Then, as for the key to the elemental aspect of luck:
Form the luck aspect of (those born in the mouse, dragon and
The monkey sign and the iron ſelement]
Form the luck aspect of (those born in) the tiger, horse and dog (years).
monkey (years)
The pig sign and the water (element]
Form the luck aspect of (those born in the pig, sheep and hare (years).
[Thus, from the standpoint of the luck aspect],
The years are grouped into threes.
The tiger sign and the wood (element]
Form the luck aspect of those born in the bird, ox and snake [years),
There is no luck aspect corresponding to the earth element 49
While the snake sign and the fire (element]



70
The White Beryl
Other elemental aspects of the year In addition to the aforementioned elemental aspects of the vitality, body, destiny and luck, the calculation
may also take into account the natal numeric square indicative of the subject's own luck (rang-klung skyes-pa'i sme-ba),5° and the natal tri-
gram indicative of the luck aspect of the subject's mother (ma-klung skyes-pa'i spar-kha). So, Lo-chen adds:
In addition to those four aspects of vitality, body, destiny and luck,
One should also add the natal numeric square indicative of the subject's own luck,
And the natal trigram indicative of the luck of the subject's mother.
In this way, the calculation for each [year] may also have six aspects.
Plate 3, fig. 2 (Ms l: ff. 13-15): Years of the sexagenary cycle
BASOD3
1. Wood mouse year (shing-byi lo)
body element (lus)
iron, symbolised by 'molten iron cauldron' (khro-chu'i Icags) and originating from the
turtle's skull (don-du rus-sbal-gyi thod-rus) 51
water, symbolised by blue head
wood, symbolised by green clothing
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
wood, symbolised by green belt 2
wood, symbolised by leafy mat
White 1
Green 4
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
Red 7
Mars and earth tiger
se-zhig
2. Wood ox year (shing-glang lo)
body element (lus)
iron, symbolised by 'molten iron cauldron' (khro-chu'i Icags) and originating from the
turtle's skull (don-du rus-sbal-gyi thod-rus)
earth, symbolised by yellow head
wood, symbolised by green clothing
water, symbolised by blue belt
water, symbolised by watery mat
Plate 3, fig. 2 1. Wood mouse year, 2. Wood ox year.
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
Red 9
Blue 3
White 6
Jupiter and iron hare
'dun-khur
3. Fire tiger year (me-stag lo)
body element (lus)
fire, symbolised by 'wild fire' (rtsub-pa'i me) and originating from the heat of the ſturtle's]
genital erection (dbang-po srang-ba'i drod-me)
wood, symbolised by green head
fire, symbolised by red clothing
iron, symbolised by white belt
iron, symbolised by iron mat
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
White 8
Black 2
Yellow 5
Saturn and water dragon
se-zhig
4. Fire hare year (me-yos lo)
body element (lus)
fire, symbolised by 'wild fire' (rtsub-pa'i me) and originating from the heat of the ſturtle's]
genital erection (dbang-po srang-ba'i drod-me)
wood, symbolised by green head
fire, symbolised by red clothing
fire, symbolised by red belt
fire, symbolised by fiery mat
Plate 3, fig. 23. Fire tiger year, 4. Fire hare year.
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
Red 7
White 1
Green 4
Moon and wood snake
se-zhig



Above Detail of Plate 3, fig. 2, showing the earth dragon and earth snake years
5. Earth dragon year (sa-'brug lo)
body element (lus)
wood, symbolised by 'reclining tree' (nyal-ba'i shing and originating from the blood
vessels of the ſturtle's] womb (mngal-gyi rtsa)
vitality element (srog)
earth, symbolised by yellow head
earth, symbolised by yellow clothing
wood, symbolised by green belt
wood, symbolised by leafy mat
White 6
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (Srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza'gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
Red 9
Blue 3
Mars and fire horse
kha-yan
6. Earth snake year (sa-sbrul lo)
body element (lus)
wood, symbolised by 'reclining tree' (nyal-ba'i shing and originating from the blood
vessels of the ſturtle's] womb (mngal-gyi rtsa)
fire, symbolised by red head
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (Srog-sme)
earth, symbolised by yellow clothing
water, symbolised by blue belt
water, symbolised by watery mat
Yellow 5
Plate 3, fig. 25. Earth dragon year, 6. Earth snake year.
White 8
Black 2
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
Jupiter and earth sheep
se-zhig



72
The White Beryl
Plate 4, fig. 2 (Ms I: ff. 16-19): Years of the sexagenary cycle (continued)
7. Iron horse year (Icags-rta lo)
body element (lus)
earth, symbolised by earth edges and centre' (mtha'-dbus sa) and originating from the
flesh of the ſturtle's] tongue (Ice-sha)
fire, symbolised by red head
iron, symbolised by white clothing
iron, symbolised by white belt
iron, symbolised by iron mat
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
Green 4
Red 7
White 1
Saturn and iron monkey
kha-ral
8. Iron sheep year (Icags-lug lo)
body element (lus)
earth, symbolised by 'earth edges and centre' (mtha'-dbus sa) and originating from the
flesh of the (turtle's] tongue (Ice-sha)
vitality element (srog)
earth, symbolised by yellow head
iron, symbolised by white clothing
fire, symbolised by red belt
fire, symbolised by fiery mat
Blue 3
Plate 4. fig. 27. Iron horse year, 8. Iron sheep year.
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (Srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
White 6
Red 9
Moon and water bird
se-zhig
9. Water monkey year (chu-spre lo)
body element (lus)
iron, symbolised by an 'iron on the calf of the leg' (gdong-thog Icags) and originating from
the (turtle's] tibia (ngar-gdong rus)
MIHAI
iron, symbolised by white head
water, symbolised by blue clothing
wood, symbolised by green belt
wood, symbolised by leafy mat
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (Srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
Black 2
-
Yellow 5
White 8
Mars and wood dog
UA
se-zhig
10. Water bird year (chu-bya lo)
body element (lus)
iron, symbolised by an 'iron on the calf of the leg' (gdong-thog Icags) and originating from
the (turtle's] tibia (ngar-gdong rus)
iron, symbolised by white head
water, symbolised by blue clothing
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
water, symbolised by blue belt
water, symbolised by watery mat
White 1
Plate 4. fig. 29. Water monkey year, 10. Water bird year.
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
Green 4
Red 7
Jupiter and fire pig
se-zhig



73
The hidden points of the turtle divination chart
11. Wood dog year (shing-khyi lo)
body element (lus)
fire, symbolised by the 'fire of the summit' (rtse-me) and originating from the 'warmth of
the (turtle's] vagina' (mtshan-ma'i drod)
earth, symbolised by yellow head
wood, symbolised by green clothing
iron, symbolised by white belt33
iron, symbolised by iron mat
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (Srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza'gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
Red 9
Blue 3
White 6
Saturn and earth mouse
'dun-khur
12. Wood pig year (shing-phag lo)
body element (lus)
fire, symbolised by the 'fire of the summit' (rtse-me) and originating from the 'warmth of
the ſturtle's] vagina' (mtshan-ma'i drod)
water, symbolised by blue head
wood, symbolised by green clothing
fire, symbolised by red belt
fire, symbolised by fiery mat
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (Srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
White 8
Plate 4, fig. 211. Wood dog year, 12. Wood pig year.
Black 2
Yellow 5
Moon and iron ox
se-zhig
13. Fire mouse year (me-byi lo)
body element (lus)
water, symbolised by 'saliva' and originating from the (turtle's]
'saliva' (kha-rub chu/kha-chu)
vitality element (srog)
water, symbolised by blue head
destiny element (dbang-thang)
fire, symbolised by red clothing
wood, symbolised by green belt
wood, symbolised by leafy mat
Red 7
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
White 1
Green 4
Mars and water tiger
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
kha-ral
On
14. Fire ox year (me-glang lo)
body element (lus)
water, symbolised by 'saliva' and originating from the ſturtle's]
'saliva' (kha-rub chu/kha-chu)
earth, symbolised by yellow head
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
fire, symbolised by red clothing
water, symbolised by blue belt
water, symbolised by watery mat
Plate 4, fig. 2 13. Fire mouse year, 14. Fire ox year.
White 6
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (Srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza'gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
Red 9
Blue 3
Jupiter and wood hare
khong-nong



74
The White Beryl
Plate 5, fig. 2 (Ms 1: ff. 13-15): Years of the sexagenary cycle (continued)
15. Earth tiger year (sa-stag lo)
body element (lus)
earth, symbolised by a 'door-lintel' (sgo-them sa) and originating from the 'flesh of the
(turtle's] penis' (pho-mtshan sha)
vitality element (srog)
wood, symbolised by green head
earth, symbolised by yellow clothing
iron, symbolised by white belt
iron, symbolised by iron mat
Yellow 5
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
White 8
Black 2
Saturn and fire dragon
kha-ral
16. Earth hare year (sa-yos lo)
body element (lus)
earth, symbolised by a 'door-lintel' (sgo-them sa) and originating from the 'flesh of the
(turtle's] penis' (pho-mtshan sha)
wood, symbolised by green head
earth, symbolised by yellow clothing
fire, symbolised by red belt
fire, symbolised by fiery mat
P
r
o
15. Earth tiger year, 16. Earth hare year.
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
Green 4
Red 7
White 1
Moon and earth snake
kha-ral
17. Iron dragon year (Icags-'brug lo)
body element (lus)
iron, symbolised by a 'white conch' (dung-dkar Icags) and originating from the (turtle's]
'breast-bone' (snying-dbus rus-pa)
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
earth, symbolised by yellow head
iron, symbolised by white clothing
wood, symbolised by green belt
wood, symbolised by leafy mat
PAN
Blue 3
EN
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (Srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
11
DA
White 6
Red 9
Mars and iron horse
se-zhig
SER
18. Iron snake year (Icags-sbrul lo)
body element (lus)
iron, symbolised by a 'white conch' (dung-dkar Icags) and originating from the (turtle's]
'breast-bone' (snying-dbus rus-pa)
fire, symbolised by red head
iron, symbolised by white clothing
water, symbolised by blue belt
TE
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
TIS
water, symbolised by watery mat
Plate 5, fig. 217. Iron dragon year, 18. Iron snake year.
Black 2
Yellow 5
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (Srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
White 8
Jupiter and water sheep
kha-ral



75
The hidden points of the turtle divination chart
19. Water horse year (chu-rta lo)
body element (lus)
wood, symbolised by a Chinese willow' (rgya-lcang shing) and originating from the
(turtle's 'uvula blood vessel' (Ice-chung rtsa)
fire, symbolised by red head
water, symbolised by blue clothing
iron, symbolised by white belt
iron, symbolised by iron mat
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (Srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
White 1
Green 4
Red 7
Saturn and wood monkey
'dun-khur
20. Water sheep year (chu-lug lo)
body element (lus)
wood, symbolised by a 'Chinese willow' (rgya-Icang shing) and originating from the
(turtle's] 'uvula blood vessel' (Ice-chung rtsa)
earth, symbolised by yellow head
water, symbolised by blue clothing
fire, symbolised by red belt
fire, symbolised by fiery mat
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (Srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
Red 9
Plate 5, fig. 2 19. Water horse year, 20. Water sheep year.
Blue 3
White 6
Moon and fire bird
kha-ral
21. Wood monkey year (shing-spre lo)
IS
body element (lus)
water, symbolised by a 'canal' (yur-ba'i chu) and originating from the ſturtle's]
'main blood vessel' (rtsa-bo-che'i khrag)
vitality element (srog)
iron, symbolised by white head
destiny element (dbang-thang)
wood, symbolised by green clothing
wood, symbolised by green belt
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
wood, symbolised by leafy mat
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
White 8
Black 2
Yellow 5
vitality numeric square (Srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
Mars and earth dog
kha-ral
22. Wood bird year (shing-bya lo)
body element (lus)
water, symbolised by a 'canal' (yur-ba'i chu) and originating from the ſturtle's]
'main blood vessel' (rtsa-bo-che'i khrag)
iron, symbolised by white head
wood, symbolised by green clothing
water, symbolised by blue belt
water, symbolised by watery mat
Plate 5, fig. 2 21. Wood monkey year, 22. Wood bird year.
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
Red 7
White 1
Green 4
Jupiter and iron pig
kha-ral



76
The White Beryl
23. Fire dog year (me-khyi lo)
body element (lus)
DO
earth, symbolised by a 'shrine' (Iha-rten sa) and originating from the ſturtle's]
'flesh of the heart' (snying-gi sha)
earth, symbolised by yellow head
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
fire, symbolised by red clothing
iron, symbolised by white belt 54
iron, symbolised by iron mat
White 6
Red 9
Blue 3
Saturn and water mouse
khong-nong
24. Fire pig year (me-phag lo)
body element (lus)
earth, symbolised by a 'shrine' (Iha-rten sa) and originating from the ſturtle's]
'flesh of the heart' (snying-gi sha)
water, symbolised by blue head
fire, symbolised by red clothing
fire, symbolised by red belt55
fire, symbolised by fiery mat
Plate 5. fig. 223. Fire dog year, 24. Fire pig year.
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (Srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
Yellow 5
White 8
Black 2
Moon and wood ox
kha-ral
Plate 6, fig. 2 (Ms 1: ff. 25-30): Years of the sexagenary cycle (continued)
25. Earth mouse year (sa-byi lo)
body element (lus)
fire, symbolised by a 'fiery thunderbolt' (thog-gi me) and originating from the
'warmth of the ſturtle's] bones' (rus-nang drod)
water, symbolised by blue head
earth, symbolised by yellow clothing
wood, symbolised by green belt
wood, symbolised by leafy mat
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (Srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
Green 4
Red 7
White 1
Mars and fire tiger
'dun-khur
26. Earth ox year (sa-glang lo)
body element (lus)
fire, symbolised by a 'fiery thunderbolt' (thog-gi me) and originating from the
'warmth of the ſturtle's] bones' (rus-nang drod)
earth, symbolised by yellow head
earth, symbolised by yellow clothing
water, symbolised by blue belt
water, symbolised by watery mat
Plate 6, fig. 225. Earth mouse year, 26. Earth ox year.
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (Srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
Blue 3
White 6
Red 9
Jupiter and earth hare
kha-yan



77
The hidden points of the turtle divination chart
anscurumunawaan at
27. Iron tiger year (Icags-stag lo)
body element (lus)
wood, symbolised by a 'juniper tree' (shug-pa'i shing) and originating from the
'blood vessels of the ſturtle's) lungs and liver' (glo-mchin rtsa)
wood, symbolised by green head
iron, symbolised by white clothing
iron, symbolised by white belt 56
iron, symbolised by iron mat
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (Srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
Black 2
Yellow 5
White 8
Saturn and iron dragon
dun-khur
28. Iron hare year (Icags-yos lo)
body element (lus)
wood, symbolised by a "juniper tree' (shug-pa'i shing) and originating from the
'blood vessels of the ſturtle's) lungs and liver' (glo-mchin rtsa)
wood, symbolised by green head
iron, symbolised by white clothing
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
fire, symbolised by red belt
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
fire, symbolised by fiery mat
White 1
Plate 6, fig. 227. Iron tiger year, 28. Iron hare year.
Green 4
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
Red 7
Moon (missing) and water snake
'dun-khur
29. Water dragon year (chu-'brug lo)
body element (lus)
water, symbolised by a 'silvery river' (dngul-dkar chu) and originating from the (turtle's]
'urine' (dri-chu)
earth, symbolised by yellow head
water, symbolised by blue clothing
wood, symbolised by green belts
wood, symbolised by leafy mat
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (Srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
Red 9
Blue 3
White 6
Mars and wood horse
kha-ral
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
30. Water snake year (chu-sbrul lo)
body element (lus)
water, symbolised by a 'silvery river' (dngul-dkar chu) and originating from the ſturtle's]
'urine' (dri-chu)
fire, symbolised by red head
water, symbolised by blue clothing
water, symbolised by blue belt
water, symbolised by watery mat
Plate 6, fig. 229. Water dragon year, 30. Water snake year.
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (Srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
White 8
Black 2
Yellow 5
Jupiter and fire sheep
'dun-khur



78
The White Beryl
31. Wood horse year (shing-rta lo)
body element (lus)
iron, symbolised by 'iron-ore' (sa-nang Icags) and originating from the ſturtle's]
'skeleton' (rkang-rus)
fire, symbolised by red head
wood, symbolised by green clothing
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
iron, symbolised by white belt
iron, symbolised by iron mat
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
Red 7
White 1
vitality numeric square (srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
Green 4
Saturn and earth monkey
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza'gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
khong-nong
32. Wood sheep year (shing-lug lo)
body element (lus)
iron, symbolised by 'iron-ore' (sa-nang Icags) and originating from the ſturtle's]
'skeleton' (rkang-rus)
earth, symbolised by yellow head
wood, symbolised by green clothing
fire, symbolised by red belt
fire, symbolised by fiery mat
Plate 6. fig231. Wood horse year, 32. Wood sheep year.
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (Srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
White 8
Red 9
Blue 3
Moon and iron bird
'dun-khur
46
33. Fire monkey year (me-spre lo)
body element (lus)
fire, symbolised by a 'kitchen fire' (thab-nang me) and originating from the 'warmth of the
(turtle's] heart' (snying-gi drod)
iron, symbolised by white head
fire, symbolised by red clothing
wood, symbolised by green belt
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
wood, symbolised by leafy mat
Yellow 5
White 8
Black 2
Mars and water dog
'dun-khur
34. Fire bird year (me-bya lo)
body element (lus)
fire, symbolised by a 'kitchen fire' (thab-nang me) and originating from the 'warmth of the
(turtle's] heart' (snying-gi drod)
iron, symbolised by white head
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
fire, symbolised by red clothing
water, symbolised by blue belt
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
water, symbolised by watery mat
Green 4
Plate 6. fig. 233. Fire monkey year, 34. Fire bird year.
Red 7
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
White 1
Jupiter and earth pig
'dun-khur



79
The hidden points of the turtle divination chart
35. Earth dog year (sa-khyi lo)
body element (lus)
wood, symbolised by a 'barberry tree' (skyer-pa'i shing and originating from the
'blood vessels of the (turtle's) liver' (mchin-rtsa)
earth, symbolised by yellow head
earth, symbolised by yellow clothing
iron, symbolised by white belt
iron, symbolised by iron mat
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (Srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
Blue 3
White 6
Red 9
Saturn and fire mouse
kha-yan
36. Earth pig year (sa-phag lo)
body element (lus)
wood, symbolised by a 'barberry tree' (skyer-pa'i shing) and originating from the
'blood vessels of the (turtle's) liver' (mchin-rtsa)
water, symbolised by blue head
earth, symbolised by yellow clothing
fire, symbolised by red belt
fire, symbolised by fiery mat
Plate 6, fig. 235. Earth dog year, 36. Earth pig year.
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
Black 2
Yellow 5
White 8
Moon and earth ox
'dun-khur
Below Detail of Plate 6, fig. 2, showing the fire monkey and fire bird years
SU



80
The White Beryl
Plate 7, fig. 2 (Ms l: ff. 31-34): Years of the sexagenary cycle (continued)
37. Iron mouse year (Icags-byi lo)
body element (lus)
earth, symbolised by a 'hundredfold burial site' (brgya-dur sa) and originating from the
(turtle's] “flesh' (sha)
water, symbolised by blue head
iron, symbolised by white clothing
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
wood, symbolised by green belt
wood, symbolised by leafy mat
White 1
Green 4
Red 7
Mars and earth tiger
khong-nong
38. Iron ox year (Icags-glang lo)
body element (lus)
5
4
earth, symbolised by a 'hundredfold burial site' (brgya-dur sa) and originating from the
(turtle's] 'flesh' (sha)
earth, symbolised by yellow head
iron, symbolised by white clothing
water, symbolised by blue belt
water, symbolised by watery mat
Plate / fig. 237. Iron mouse year, 38. Iron ox year, 39. Water tiger year, 40. Water hare year.
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (Srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
Red 9
Blue 3
White 6
Jupiter and water hare
se-zhig
39. Water tiger year (chu-stag lo)
body element (lus)
iron, symbolised by 'iron in the kitchen' (thab-nang Icags) and originating from the ſturtle's]
"patella' (pus-rus)
wood, symbolised by green head
water, symbolised by blue clothing
iron, symbolised by white belt
iron, symbolised by iron mat
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (Srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
White 8
Black 2
Yellow 5
Saturn and wood dragon
khong-nong
40. Water hare year (chu-yos lo)
body element (lus)
iron, symbolised by 'iron in the kitchen' (thab-nang Icags) and originating from the ſturtle's]
patella' (pus-rus)
wood, symbolised by green head
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
water, symbolised by blue clothing
fire, symbolised by red belt
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
fire, symbolised by fiery mat
Red 7
White 1
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza'gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
Green 4
Moon and fire snake
khong-nong



81
The hidden points of the turtle divination chart
41. Wood dragon year (shing-'brug lo)
body element (lus)
fire, symbolised by 'fire in rain' (char-nang me) and originating from the 'warmth of the
ſturtle's) breath' (rlang-pa'i drod)
earth, symbolised by yellow head
wood, symbolised by green clothing
wood, symbolised by green belt
wood, symbolised by leafy mat
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (Srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
White 658
Red 9
Blue 3
Mars and earth horse
'dun-khur
42. Wood snake year (shing-sbrul lo)
body element (lus)
fire, symbolised by 'fire in rain' (char-nang me) and originating from the 'warmth of the
(turtle's] breath' (rlang-pa'i drod)
fire, symbolised by red head
wood, symbolised by green clothing
water, symbolised by blue belt
water, symbolised by watery mat
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (Srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
Yellow 5
Plate 7, fig. 241. Wood dragon year, 42. Wood snake year, 43. Fire horse year, 44. Fire sheep year.
White 8
Black 2
Jupiter and iron sheep
khong-nong
43. Fire horse year (me-rta lo)
body element (lus)
water, symbolised by 'rainfall' (gnam-char chu) and originating from the turtle's]
"tears' (mig-gi chu)
fire, symbolised by red head
fire, symbolised by red clothing
iron, symbolised by white belt
iron, symbolised by iron mat
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (Srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
Green 4
Red 7
White 1
Saturn and water monkey
kha-yan
44. Fire sheep year (me-lug lo)
body element (lus)
water, symbolised by 'rainfall' (gnam-char chu) and originating from the turtle's]
"tears' (mig-gi chu)
earth, symbolised by yellow head
fire, symbolised by red clothing
fire, symbolised by red belt
fire, symbolised by fiery mat
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (Srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
Blue 3
White 6
Red 9
Moon and wood bird
khong-nong



82
The White Beryl
45. Earth monkey year (sa-spre lo)
body element (lus)
earth, symbolised by Mt. Sumeru' (ri-rab sa) and originating from the turtle's]
'breasts' (brang-gi sha)
MIL
iron, symbolised by white head
SO
earth, symbolised by yellow clothing
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
wood, symbolised by green belt
wood, symbolised by leafy mat
Black 2
Yellow 5
vitality numeric square (Srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
White 8
Mars and fire dog
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
khong-nong
46. Earth bird year (sa-bya lo)
body element (lus)
earth, symbolised by ‘Mt. Sumeru' (ri-rab sa) and originating from the turtle's]
'breasts' (brang-gi sha)
iron, symbolised by white head
earth, symbolised by yellow clothing
water, symbolised by blue belt
water, symbolised by watery mat
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
White 1
Plate 7, fig. 245. Earth monkey year, 46. Earth bird year, 47. Iron dog year, 48. Iron pig year.
Green 4
Red 7
Jupiter and earth pig
khong-nong
47. Iron dog year (Icags-khyi lo)
body element (lus)
iron, symbolised by 'iron knives and choppers' (gri-zor Icags) and originating from
[the turtle's] 'molars' (so 'gram-pa)
earth, symbolised by yellow head
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
iron, symbolised by white clothing
iron, symbolised by white belt
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
iron, symbolised by iron mat
Red 9
Blue 3
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (Srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
White 6
Saturn and iron mouse
se-zhig
48. Iron pig year (Icags-phag lo)
body element (lus)
iron, symbolised by 'iron knives and choppers' (gri-zor Icags) and originating from
[the turtle's) 'molars' (so 'gram-pa)
water, symbolised by blue head
iron, symbolised by white clothing
fire, symbolised by red belt
fire, symbolised by fiery mat
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
White 8
Black 2
Yellow 5
Moon and water ox
khong-nong



83
The hidden points of the turtle divination chart
49. Water mouse year (chu-byi lo)
body element (lus)
wood, symbolised by the 'Wish-granting Tree' (dpag-bsam shing) and originating from
the blood-vessels of the ſturtle's) liver' (mchin-rtsa)
water, symbolised by blue head
water, symbolised by blue clothing
wood, symbolised by green belt
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (Srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
wood, symbolised by leafy mat
Red 7
White 1
Green 4
Mars and wood tiger
kha-yan
50. Water ox year (chu-glang lo)
body element (lus)
wood, symbolised by the 'Wish-granting Tree' (dpag-bsam shing and originating from
'the blood vessels of the ſturtle's) liver' (mchin-rtsa)
earth, symbolised by yellow head
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
water, symbolised by blue clothing
water, symbolised by blue belt
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
water, symbolised by watery mat
White 6
Plate 7, fig. 249. Water mouse year, 50. Water ox year, 51. Wood tiger year, 52. Wood hare year.
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
Red 9
Blue 3
Jupiter and fire hare
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
kha-ral
51. Wood tiger year (shing-stag lo)
body element (lus)
vitality element (srog)
water, symbolised by 'water in dust' (rdul-nang chu) and originating from the turtle's]
'gastric fluid' (pho-ba'i chu)
wood, symbolised by green head
wood, symbolised by green clothing
iron, symbolised by white belt
destiny element (dbang-thang)
iron, symbolised by iron mat
Yellow 5
White 8
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (Srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
Black 2
Saturn and earth dragon
kha-yan
52. Wood hare year (shing-yos lo)
body element (lus)
water, symbolised by 'water in dust' (rdul-nang chu) and originating from the turtle's]
'gastric fluid' (pho-ba'i chu
wood, symbolised by green head
wood, symbolised by green clothing
fire, symbolised by red belt
fire, symbolised by fiery mat
Green 4
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
Red 7
White 1
Moon and iron snake
kha-yan



84
The White Beryl
Plate 8, fig. 2 (Ms I:ff. 35–36): Years of the sexagenary cycle (continued)
53. Fire dragon year (me-'brug lo)
body element (lus)
earth, symbolised by grassland' (na-phod sa) and originating from the turtle's]
'nipples' (nu-ma'i sha)
earth, symbolised by yellow head
fire, symbolised by red clothing
wood, symbolised by green belt
wood, symbolised by leafy mat
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (Srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza'gnyis)
Blue 3
White 6
Red 9
coon
Mars and water horse
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
khong-nong
54. Fire snake year (me-sbrul lo)
body element (lus)
earth, symbolised by 'grassland' (na-phod sa) and originating from [the turtle's]
'nipples' (nu-ma'i sha)
fire, symbolised by red head
fire, symbolised by red clothing
water, symbolised by blue belt
water, symbolised by watery mat
Plate fig. 53. Fire dragon year, 54. Fire snake year, 55. Earth horse year, 56. Earth sheep year.
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
Black 2
Yellow 5
White 8
Jupiter and wood sheep
kha-yan
55. Earth horse year (sa-rta lo)
body element (lus)
fire, symbolised by a phoenix" (bya-'bar me) and originating from (the turtle's]
'warmth of the legs' (rkang-drod)
fire, symbolised by red head
earth, symbolised by yellow clothing
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
iron, symbolised by white belt
iron, symbolised by iron mat
White 1
Green 4
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
Red 7
Saturn and fire monkey
se-zhig
56. Earth sheep year (sa-lug lo)
body element (lus)
fire, symbolised by a 'phoenix' (bya-'bar me) and originating from [the turtle's]
'warmth of the legs' (rkang-drod)
earth, symbolised by yellow head
earth, symbolised by yellow clothing
fire, symbolised by red belt
fire, symbolised by fiery mat
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
Red 9
Blue 3
White 6
Moon and earth bird
kha-yan



85
The hidden points of the turtle divination chart
57. Iron monkey year (Icags-spre lo)
body element (lus)
wood, symbolised by a 'mulberry bush' ('o-se shing) and originating from the turtle's]
'blood vessels of the large intestine' (long-rtsa)
iron, symbolised by white head
wood, symbolised by green clothing
wood, symbolised by green belt
wood, symbolised by leafy mat
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (Srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
White 8
Black 2
Yellow 5
Mars and iron dog
kha-yan
58. Iron bird year (Icags-bya lo)
body element (lus)
wood, symbolised by a 'mulberry bush' ('o-se shing and originating from the turtle's)
'blood vessels of the large intestine' (long-rtsa)
iron, symbolised by white head
iron, symbolised by white clothing
water, symbolised by blue belt
water, symbolised by watery mat
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
Red 7
Plate 8, fig. 2 57. Iron monkey year, 58. Iron bird year, 59. Water dog year, 60. Water pig year.
White 1
Green 4
Jupiter and water pig
kha-yan
59. Water dog year (chu-khyi lo)
body element (lus)
water, symbolised by 'ocean water' (rgya-mtsho'i chu) and originating from (the turtle's)
'urine of the urinary bladder' (sgang-ba'i chu
earth, symbolised by yellow head
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
water, symbolised by blue clothing
iron, symbolised by white belt
iron, symbolised by iron mat
White 6
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (Srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
Red 9
Blue 3
Saturn and wood mouse
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
kha-ral
60. Water pig year (chu-phag-lo)
body element (lus)
water, symbolised by 'ocean water' (rgya-mtsho'i chu) and originating from the turtle's]
'urine of the urinary bladder' (sgang-ba'i chu)
water, symbolised by blue head
water, symbolised by blue clothing
fire, symbolised by red belt
fire, symbolised by fiery mat
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang-thang)
luck aspect (klung-rta)
actual luck element (khams-nyid)
natal numeric square (skye-sme)
vitality numeric square (Srog-sme)
destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
two planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza' gnyis)
relationship of destiny element with vitality element
Yellow 5
White 8
Black 2
Moon and fire ox
kha-yan



86
The White Beryl
Standard and inverse year calculations
The years of the sexagenary cycle may be calculated according to a standard' (dkyus-ma) method of consecutive numbering, starting from
the wood mouse and continuing through the wood ox, fire tiger and so forth, down to the water pig year, as depicted on Plates 3–8 and
16–22. Alternatively, there is an 'inverse' (ldog) method of calculation used for determining the so-called log-men aspect. If the subject of
the divination is male, he should determine whichever of the five elements forms a son-relationship with his destiny element, and count
forwards from the tiger. For example, in the case of a man born in the iron tiger year corresponding to 1950 one should determine that the
element in a son-relationship with the destiny element is water, and begin the count in consecutive numerical order from the water tiger
year. Whichever animal sign a man has, he should begin counting from the appropriate tiger year, and continue counting down the
number of years corresponding to his present age (49) to arrive at the log-men sign, in the case of this example, the earth ox (sa-glang lo).
Thus the subject's log-men year will change from one year to the next according to the changes of the year-cycle. In the case of a woman,
one should determine whichever of the five elements forms a mother-relationship with the destiny element, and count backwards from
the monkey. For example, in the case of a woman born in the wood male mouse year, the count should begin in reverse starting from
the water monkey.
Commentaries enumerate diverse portents associated with the log-men year. Among them, in the case of males,
the log-men dog is the heavenly gate' (gnam-sgo) and log-men pig is the earthly gate' (sa-sgo);"9 whereas for females the log-men dragon is
the 'heavenly gate' and log-men snake is the earthly gate’. Furthermore, the five log-men ox and sheep years are harbingers of the corre-
sponding inauspicious ‘five calamities' (phung-gyod lnga), the five log-men bird and monkey years are harbingers of the corresponding
inauspicious ‘five separations' (bye-bral Inga), the five log-men mouse and horse years are harbingers of the corresponding inauspicious
‘five lineage interruptions' (rus-chod lnga),60 while the five log-men tiger and hare years are harbingers of the corresponding auspicious
‘five acquisitions' ('byor-pa lnga). In addition, if one counts backwards from the log-men for five year-signs, one arrives at the 'heavenly
lifeline' aspect (gnam-gyi 'ju-thag) through which the vitality elemental aspect of the log-men is secured. 61 If one counts forward from the
log-men for five year-signs, one arrives at the ‘earthly peg'aspect (sa-yi rten-phur) through which the body elemental aspect of the log-men
is secured. If one counts backwards from the log-men for eight year-signs, one arrives at the heavenly extension’aspect (gnam-brgyangs),
through which the destiny elemental aspect of the log-men is secured; and if one counts forwards from the log-men for eight year-signs,
one arrives at the earthly extension' aspect (sa-brgyangs), through which the luck elemental aspect of the log-men is secured.
Finally the log-men also determines the negative influences known as the ‘cutting influence of demons' (bdud-
chad) and the ‘roaming of the life-spiriť (bla-'khyams). When the vitality and destiny elements of the subject's log-men form an enemy-
relationship with the vitality and destiny elements of the subject's natal year, there is a mutual impact during a specified pair of male or
female years. For example, when the subject has the log-men male wood tiger, he or she will be susceptible to the ‘cutting influence of
demons' during the male earth dog and earth dragon years, and to the “roaming of the life-spiriť during the female earth ox and sheep
years. Alternatively, when the subject has the log-men female wood hare, he or she will be susceptible to the ‘cutting influence of demons'
during the female earth ox and earth sheep years, and to the ‘roaming of the life-spirit during the male earth dog and dragon years.
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī provides the following explanation of the standard and inverse year calculations (Moonbeams, ff. 6b-7a):
The years also have 'standard' and 'inverse' modes of calculation:
For example, in the case of (one born in the wood male mouse year,
The log-men mouse and horse are harbingers of [the inauspicious]
of one's own (natal ] year,
The 'standard' mode is enumerated in the sequence:
If the subject is a male, the count should begin from the fire tiger,
'five lineage interruptions',
There is a mutual impact during pairs of male years and female years:
Wood mouse, wood ox, fire tiger, etc. according to consecutive
And if the subject is a female, from the water monkey.
In one case (one is susceptible to the 'cutting influence of demons',
The log-men tiger and hare are harbingers of the auspicious]
'five acquisitions'.
numbering, 62
Then counting in the [correct] computational sequence
And in the other to the 'roaming of the life-spirit'.
As far as the water pig year.
Backwards [for women) and forwards [for men),
For example, when one's log-men is the (male) wood tiger [year],
[One is susceptible to the 'cutting influence of demons'
One arrives at the log-men sign, with reference to which,
If one counts backwards [from the log-men] for five [signs),
The 'inverse' mode refers to the computational sequence of the years,
One should then consult the [appropriate] commentaries.
One arrives at the heavenly lifeline' aspect.
During the [male) earth dog and earth dragon years,
And to the 'roaming of the life-spirit'.
[Through which the log-men aspect is determined].
In the case of a male, [one should determine)
In the case of males, the log-men dog is the 'heavenly gate',
During the (female) earth ox and sheep years.
Similarly, when one's log-men is the (female) wood hare [year],
Whichever of the five ſelements) has a son-relationship
If one counts forwards (from the log-men] for five (signs),
One arrives at the 'earthly peg' aspect.
If one counts backwards [from the log-men] for eight (signs),
One arrives at the 'heavenly extension' aspect.
If one counts forwards [from the log-men] for eight [signs),
And log-men pig is the earthly gate'.
[with the destiny element),
In the case of females, the log-men dragon is the 'heavenly gate',
[One is susceptible to] the 'cutting influence of demons'
And count forwards from the tiger.
And log-men snake is the earthly gate'.
During the (female) earth ox and earth sheep years,
In the case of a woman, [one should determine]
The log-men ox and sheep are harbingers of [the inauspicious]
One arrives at the 'earthly extension' aspect.
And to the 'roaming of the life-spirit'
Whichever of the five [elements) has a mother-relationship
'five calamities'
During the ſmale) earth dog and dragon years.
This (computational sequence] should be applied to all
[with the destiny element],
The log-men bird and monkey are harbingers of [the inauspicious]
When the vitality and destiny aspects of one's own log-men
And count backwards from the monkey.
'five separations,
Enter into an enemy-relationship with the vitality and destiny aspects
[of the log-men years]
Subjects of divination and corresponding elements
Divinations concerning certain types of subject should, it is said, be made on the basis of specific elements. For example (Moonbeams, f. 7a/b):
Matters concerning father, paternal uncle and paternal grandfather
Are calculated according to the wood element.
Matters concerning male and female descendants63
Are calculated according to the fire element.
Matters concerning land, countryside and castles
Are calculated according to the earth element.
Matters concerning maternal relatives, wealth, friends, deities and protectors
Are to be calculated according to the iron element.
Matters concerning the four types of sibling relative 64
Are calculated according to the water element



87
The hidden points of the turtle divination chart
Other aspects of year calculation
There are certain other aspects dependent on the year of the subject's birth which have their impact on the divination and its readings.
Thus, the year-sign identical to that of the subject's birth portends personal obstacles (rang-keg) befalling the subject. The year-sign
immediately following that of one's birth suggests ailments and enemies (nad-dgra),65 the next or third-removed year-sign suggests the
inauspicious ‘four separations' (bye-bral bzhi), and the next or fourth-removed portends adversaries (gshed). However, the fifth, sixth and
seventh, which are respectively known as lnga-mthun, drug-'gras and bdun-zuph6 years, are deemed to be auspicious. At the same time, the
year-sign counted four places backwards suggests alternate adversaries (gshed) and ill-health, while the one counted four places for-
wards, also known as the ‘greater star of the year-sign' (lo-skar che-ba), suggests alternate adversaries and death. The year-sign seven
places beyond the latter (bdun-zur) is known as the 'lesser star' (skar-chung). For example, in the case of one born in a mouse year, the
'greater star' (skar-chen) commences from the beginning of the hare year, and the ‘lesser star' (skar-chung) from the beginning of the bird
year. Sometimes these are also referred to as the greater and lesser outer death-wishes' (phyi-yi ro-'dod che-chung). Accordingly, Lo-chen
Dharmaśrī states (Moonbeams, f. 7b):
[The year sign) counted four places backwards suggests alternate
Moreover, the following should additionally be explained:
The first [year-sign, which is that of one's birth]
adversaries and ill health,
Should be known to suggest personal obstacles to oneselt,
While the one counted four places forwards suggests alternate
The second [i.e. the year-sign following that of one's birth]
adversaries and death.
suggests ailments and enemies,
The latter is also called the greater star of the year sign',
The third suggests the 'four separations, and the fourth 'adversaries',
And (the year sign seven places beyond it is called the 'lesser star'.
The fifth Inga-mthun, the sixth drug-'gras, and the seventh bdun-zur.
For example, in the case of one born in a mouse year,
When the hare year begins, there is the greater star',
And when the bird year begins, there is the 'lesser star'
In other (sources), these are called the greater and lesser outer
death wishes.'
Such (calculations should be applied to all (the year-signs).
General categories of inauspicious years
There are certain general categories of inauspicious years which have an impact on divinations concerning natal horoscope, marriage
and obstacle years, as will be indicated in the later chapters of this work. Among them are the categories known as the twelve ‘accursed
years' (nag-'thus lo), the twelve ‘inauspicious years' (lo-gnan), the ‘six lesser stars' (skar-chung drug), the seven malign years' (gdug-ba-can-
gyi lo bdun), the seven years of bad omen' (ltas-ngan lo), the seven years of drought' (than-pa lo bdun), the heavenly sentinel' (gnam-gyi
bya-ra), the ‘earthly sentinel (sa'i bya-ra), the twelve years promoting drought (than-skyes lo), ‘four black undertakers' (dur-mi nag-po
bzhi), the three soaring black sons' (lding-nag bu gsum), the four 'black fanged years' (lo-nag mche-ba-can), the eleven years susceptible to
ogres' (srin-khyer lo), the four ‘naked demons' (ther-'dre mi bzhi), the eight years endowed with the five elements' ('byung-ba Inga-ldan lo),
the ten years endowed with two elements,' ('byung-ba gnyis-ldan lo), the eight years of widowhood' (yugs-sa lo brgyad), and the eight
‘orphan years' (dva-phrug lo). Lo-chen Dharmaśrī enumerates these as follows (Moonbeams, ff. 76–8b):
The fire and water tiger and snake years,
The fire horse and water mouse years
The wood ox year coinciding with the first row of numeric squares,
The wood, iron and fire monkey years, and the iron bird year,
Are known respectively as the 'heavenly sentinel' and the
The earth snake and wood male dog with the middle row,
The iron, water and wood pig years, and the fire mouse year,
earthly sentinel
And the water sheep, earth mouse and pig, wood sheep and iron
Are all known as the 'accursed years
mouse with the bottom row
The twelve (iron] years between the iron mouse and iron pig
These eight are the 'years endowed with the five elements 68
The eight fire years between tiger and bird,
Are known as the 'years promoting drought
And the four iron years between dog and ox,
The fire hare, water bird, earth sheep and iron monkey
(Are called inauspicious years (lo-gnan)). 67
The iron ox, wood sheep, fire dog and water dragon
Coinciding with the first row of numeric squares,
Are called the 'four black undertakers'
The water snake with the middle row,
The iron bird and dog, the earth ox and dragon,
And the fire hare, iron tiger, iron dog
The fire monkey and water snake
The water tiger and snake, along with the iron monkey,
and water mouse and pig with the bottom row:
Are those of the 'six lesser stars'.
Are called the three soaring black sons'
These ten are the 'years endowed with two elements: 69
The fire and water tiger, the iron and water snake,
The tiger, monkey, pig and snake years coinciding with a 'Black Two
The iron monkey, iron pig, fire dragon and snake,
The water and wood monkey, and the wood pig
natal numeric square,
The earth sheep, iron dog wood snake and fire bird:
Are all known as the 'seven malign years!
Are called the 'black fanged years!
These are the 'eight years of widowhood'
The fire snake, water bird and pig,
The water mouse, horse, bird and hare
The wood tiger, iron monkey, fire male tiger,
The wood bird, iron pig and sheep, and earth bird,
The earth pig, dragon, bird and hare,
Water tiger, snake, pig and monkey,
Are together known as the 'years of bad omen'
The fire dragon, fire bird and water ox,
Along with the earth dog
Are the eight 'orphan years'
Are the eleven 'years susceptible to ogres
The earth dragon, iron sheep, earth monkey,
Iron bird, iron dog, fire female pig and fire ox
The fire horse, the water bird, wood hare and iron bird
Are called the seven years of drought"
Are the four 'naked demons'.



88
The White Beryl
3. Months
The twelve months (zla-ba bcu-gnyis)tº of the lunar year may be enumerated on the basis of their seasonal names, their sequence in the
contemporary lunar calendar, and their animal signs."' According to the Phug-pa system, these correspondences may be presented in
tabular form as shown in chart 2.2.72
2.2 The twelve months of the lunar year
first spring month
eleventh lunar month
tiger month
mid-spring month
twelfth lunar month
hare month
last spring month
first lunar month
dragon month
first summer month
second lunar month
snake month
mid-summer month
third lunar month
horse month
last summer month
fourth lunar month
sheep month
first autumn month
fifth lunar month
monkey month
mid-autumn month
sixth lunar month
bird month
last autumn month
seventh lunar month
dog month
first winter month
eighth lunar month
pig month
mid-winter month
ninth lunar month
mouse month
last winter month
tenth lunar month
ox month
The winter solstice occurs in the first spring month of the tiger, coinciding exactly with the full moon of the constellation
Mrgaśiras, whereas the summer solstice occurs in the first autumn month of the monkey, coinciding exactly with the full moon of the
constellation Jyesthā.13
In certain calculations the twelve animal signs are subdivided into four groups of three, corresponding to their
division into the four seasons of the year. Those representing the last seasonal months, i.e. the dragon, sheep, dog and ox, are designated
as even-numbered signs or ‘goat-horns' (rva-ru); those of the first seasonal months, i.e. the tiger, snake, monkey and pig, are designated
as odd-numbered signs or ‘rhino horns’ (bse-ru); while those of the mid-seasonal months, i.e. the hare, horse, bird and mouse, are deemed
to be irregularly numbered signs ('chol-bu). 74 Lo-chen Dharmaśrī explains (Moonbeams, f. 8b):
The four year-signs bearing the names of the four last seasonal
months (tha-chung lo bzhi) are termed even 'goat-horns'.
The four bearing the names of the four first seasonal months
(ra-ba bzh) are termed odd 'rhino horns'
The four bearing the names of the four mid-seasonal months
('bring-ngo bzh) are termed 'irregular'
According to the ancient Chinese system, it is also important to examine the negative influences present in the twelve-day mid-period of
the month (zla-sgang, Ch. zhong-run)75 and the presence or absence of an intercalary month (zla-bshol, Ch. run-yue);76 while a further sub-
division may be made according to the twenty-four meteorological phases of the year (dus-tshigs nyer-bzhi, Ch. er-shi si jie-21).77
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises this description of the months as follows (Moonbeams, f. 12a/b):
Fifth, are the twelve months [of the year]:
The winter solstice occurs in the first spring month of the tiger,
The first spring month is the eleventh lunar month, that of the tiger.
Coinciding exactly78 with the full moon of Mrgaśiras.
The middle spring month is the twelfth lunar month, that of the hare.
The summer solstice occurs in the first autumn month of the monkey,
The last spring month is the first lunar month, that of the dragon.
Coinciding exactly with the full moon of Jyesthā.
Similarly, the first summer month is the second lunar month, that of
the snake
When [the months are examined in detail,
The middle summer month is the third lunar month, that of the horse.
One should take into account the mid-periods of the month and intercalary months,
The last summer month is the fourth lunar month, that of the sheep.
Along with the [twenty-four) meteorological phases.
The first autumn month is the fifth lunar month, that of the monkey.
The middle autumn month is the sixth lunar month, that of the bird.
The last autumn month is the seventh lunar month, that of the dog.
The first winter month is the eighth lunar month, that of the pig.
The middle winter month is the ninth lunar month, that of the mouse.
The last winter month is held to be the tenth lunar month, that of the ox.



89
The hidden points of the turtle divination chart
4. Calendar days
The calendar date of the Tibetan month (tshes)"º is designated as auspicious or inauspicious, for which reason it has great importance for
spiritual practice and mundane activities including travel, haircutting, business ventures, agriculture and so forth. When the thirty cal-
endar days of the lunar month are calculated, in the case of the six male months the first day is counted from the tiger sign, and in the case
of the six female months from the monkey sign, as indicated on table 2.3 below and on Plate 1, fig. 8.
Plate 1, fig. 8 (Msi: . 3): Calculating the first calendar day (tshes) of the month
ཟླབ་ཕོ་དྲུག་ལ་སྟག་གི་ཚེས་
tiger
in the case of the six male months, the (first) day (of the month is calculated) from the tiger
monkey
In the case of the six female months, the first day (of the month is calculated) from the monkey
agar
These same animal signs therefore recur on the first, thirteenth and twenty-fifth calendar days of the lunar month. In the case of the male
months, full moon coincides with the dragon day and no-moon with the sheep day; whereas in the case of female months, full moon coin-
cides with the dog day, and no-moon with the ox day. 80 This information may be tabulated as shown in table 2.3.
Plate 1, fig. 8
2.3 The thirty days of the calendar months
Month
21
dog
22
pig
23
mouse
24
ox
25
tiger
26
hare
27
dragon
28
snake
29
horse
30
sheep
Tiger
Hare
m
15
dragon
dog
dragon
dog
16
snake
pig
snake
pig
17
horse
ouse
horse
mouse
dragon
18
sheep
ox
sheep
ox
snake
19 20
monkey bird
tiger hare
monkey bird
tiger hare
horse
sheep
monkey bird
dog
pigm ouse OX
Dragon
11
mouse
horse
mouse
horse
mouse
ouse
horse
dragon
dog
12
ox
sheep
ox
sheep
ox
Ox
sheep
snake
pig
13 14
tiger hare
monkey bird
tiger hare
monkey bird
tiger
tiger hare
hare
monkey bird
horse
mouse
sheep
ox
Snake
Horse
m
dragon
Day
1 2
tiger hare
monkey bird
tiger hare
monkey bird
tiger hare
monkey bird
tiger hare
monkey bird
tiger hare
monkey bird
tiger hare
monkey bird
dog
dragon
dog
dragon
snake
pig
snake
pig
snake
horse
3
dragon
dog
dragon
dog
dragon
dog
dragon
dog
dragon
dog
dragon
dog
m ouse
horse
mouse
horse
sheep
4
snake
pig
snake
pig
snake
pig
snake
pig
snake
pig
snake
pig
ox
sheep
ox
sheep
monkey bird
5
horse
mouse
horse
mouse
horse
mouse
horse
mouse
horse
mouse
horse
mouse
tiger hare
monkey bird
tiger hare
monkey bird
dragon
6
sheep
ox
sheep
ox
sheep
OX
sheep
ox
sheep
ox
sheep
ox
snake
7 8
monkey bird
tiger hare
monkey bird
tiger hare
monkey bird
tiger hare
monkey bird
tiger hare
monkey bird
tiger hare
monkey bird
tiger hare
horse
9
dog
dragon
dog
dragon
dog
dog
dragon
d og
dragon
dog
dragon
dog
dragon
sheep
10
pig
snake
pig
snake
pig
pig
snake
pig
snake
pig
snake
pig
snake
Sheep
d og
pig
m
ouse
ox
tiger
hare
m
dog
dragon
pig
snake
ouse
horse
ox
sheep
Monkey
mouse
ox
tiger
hare
dragon
snake
horse
sheep
monkey bird
dog
pig
mouse
ox
tiger
hare
Bird
m
dragon
snake
horse
sheep
monkey bird
dog
pig
mouse
ox
Dog
pigm ouse
ox
tiger
hare
dragon
snake
horse
sheep
Pig
horse
mouse
horse
mouse
horse
sheep
ox
sheep
ox
sheep
monkey bird
tiger hare
monkey bird
tiger hare
monkey bird
dog
dragon
dog
dragon
dog
pig
snake
pig
snake
pig
ouse
horse
mouse
horse
ouse
ox
sheep
ox
sheep
ox
tiger hare
monkey bird
tiger hare
monkey bird
tiger hare
dog
pig
mouse
ox
dog
dragon
dog
dragon
Mouse
snake
pig
snake
horse
mouse
horse
sheepm onkey bird
ox tiger hare
sheep monkey bird
dragon
snake
horse
sheep
Ox
m
dog
pig
mouse
ox
It is important to note that the lunar day is of variable length depending upon the speed of the Moon, equalling on average 0.984 solar
days. For this reason, a lunar day which commences after sunrise and ends before the following sunrise should be omitted (chad) from the
calendar, while any lunar day which includes two sunrises should be doubled (Ihag). In addition, each lunar day is subdivided into twelve
phases or two-hour periods (dus-tshod bcu-gnyis), to which the names of the twelve animals may also be applied. 81
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī adds (Moonbeams, ff. 125–13a):
Sixth, concerning the calendar dates (tshes),
In the case of the male months,
[The twelve phases or two-hour periods of each day
There are thirty days in one ſlunar) month.
Full moon occurs on the dragon (day).
Are also calculated according to the cycle of the year signs,
In the case of the six male months,
And no-moon on the sheep (day).
And [the animal names) are successively applied,
The (first] day (is calculated) from the tiger,
In the case of female months,
Until none are left over.
And in the case of the six female months,
Full moon occurs on the dog [day]
And no-moon on the
The (first] day (is calculated) from the monkey.
[These same animal signs ) recur on the first, thirteenth
and twenty-fifth (calendar days of the lunar month).
5. Hours
The calendar day is subdivided into six daytime periods (dus-tshod)82 and six night-time periods, each comprising approximately two
solar hours. When the animal signs are applied to these, the correspondences may be tabulated as shown in table 2.4.83
2.4 The twelve hours of the calendar day
Two-hour period
Dus-tshod
Animal hour
Solar time
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises this topic in the following verses (Moonbeams, f. 13a):
daybreak
gnam-lang
hare
05–07 hrs
sunrise
nyi-shar
dragon
07-09 hrs
Seventh, concerning the hours (dus-tshod):
mid-morning
nyi-'dros
snake
09–11 hrs
In a single day there are six daytime [hours) and six night-time (hours)
noon
horse
Daybreak is the hour of the hare, and sunrise the hour of the dragon
nyin-phyed
11-13 hrs
afternoon
phyed-yol
sheep
13–15 hrs
Mid-morning is the hour of the snake, and noon the hour of the horse.
late afternoon
nyin-myur
monkey
15–17 hrs
Afternoon is the hour of the sheep, and late afternoon the hour of the monkey.
sunset
nyi-nub
bird
17-19 hrs
Sunset is the hour of the bird, and twilight that of the dog.
twilight
sa-srod
dog
19–21 hrs
Late evening is the hour of the pig, and midnight that of the mouse.
late evening
srod-'khor
pig
21-23 hrs
After-midnight is the hour of the ox, and dawn is the hour of the tiger
midnight
gnam-phyed
mouse
23-01 hrs
after midnight
Ox
01-03 hrs
gnam-yol
tho-rangs
dawn
tiger
03-05 hrs



90
The White Beryl
Destiny elements of the years, months, days and hours
The destiny elements corresponding to the years and months are calculated in successive pairs, whereas those corresponding to the days
and hours are calculated one by one. Moreover, when the destiny element of the present year is in a mother-relationship, that of the
month is in a son-relationship. 84 Also, when the destiny element of the month is in a mother-relationship, that of the day is in a son-
relationship,85 and when the destiny element of the day is in a mother-relationship, that of the hour is in a son-relationship. 86
Whatever the destiny element of the present year, one should know that the tiger, hare, mouse and ox months are
in a son-relationship with it; the dragon and snake months are in a friend-relationship; the horse and sheep months are in an enemy-
relationship; the bird and monkey months are in a mother-relationship; while the dog and pig months are in an identity-relationship. 87
Table 2.5 serves to elucidate these correspondences.
2.5 Calculating the destiny elements of the twelve months
Yearly destiny element
Destiny elements of the twelve months
2.
6
10
11
12
Wood
fire tiger
fire hare
earth dragon
earth snake
iron horse
iron sheep
water monkey
water bird
wood dog
wood pig
fire mouse
fire ox
Fire
earth tiger
earth hare
iron dragon
iron snake
water horse
water sheep
wood monkey
wood bird
fire dog
fire pig
earth mouse
earth ox
Earth
iron tiger
iron hare
water dragon
water snake
wood horse
wood sheep
fire monkey
fire bird
earth dog
earth pig
iron mouse
iron ox
Iron
water tiger
water hare
wood dragon
wood snake
fire horse
fire sheep
earth monkey
earth bird
iron dog
iron pig
water mouse
water ox
Water
wood tiger
wood hare
fire dragon
fire snake
earth horse
earth sheep
iron monkey
iron bird
water dog
water pig
wood mouse
wood ox
As far as the relationship between the lunar month and its days is concerned, each month has three periods of ten days, among which the
first and sixth form a son-relationship with the month, the second and seventh form a friend-relationship, the third and eighth form an
enemy-relationship, while the fourth and ninth days form a mother-relationship, and the fifth and tenth form an identity-relationship.
Thus, for example, in a fire month the first day will have the destiny element earth, the second iron, and so forth.88 It is important to bear
in mind that the cycle of animals and destiny elements ignores an omitted calendar day (chad), but in the case of a doubled calendar day
(lhag), the immediately preceding sign and element are repeated. Table 2.6 presents the destiny elements of the thirty calendar days of
the male months (mouse, tiger, dragon, horse, monkey and dog), which all begin with the tiger day. As stated above, the calendar days of
the female months (ox, hare, snake, sheep, bird and pig) begin with the monkey day.
2.6 Calculating the destiny element of the thirty calendar days
Monthly destiny
element
Wood
7 8
earth iron
monkey bird
9
water
dog
10
wood
pig
11
fire
12
earth
13
iron
14
water
hare
15
wood
dragon
16
fire
snake
17
earth
horse
21
fire
dog
22
earth
pig
23
iron
mouse
24
water
ox
25
wood
tiger
26
fire
hare
27
earth
dragon
28
iron
snake
29
water
horse
30
wood
sheep
mouse
Ox
tiger
Fire
Destiny elements of the thirty calendar days
1 2 3 4 5 6
fire earth iron water wood fire
tiger hare dragon snake horse sheep
earth iron water wood fire earth
tiger hare dragon snake horse sheep
iron water wood fire earth iron
tiger hare dragon snake horse sheep
water wood fire earth iron water
iron
water
wood
fire
earth
iron
water
wood
fire
earth
iron
earth
iron
water
wood
fire
earth
iron
water
wood
fire
pig
hare
Earth
earth
fire
monkey bird
water wood
monkey bird
wood fire
dog
fire
dog
earth
w
mouse
iron
mouse
water
mouse
wood
mouse
tiger
wood
tiger
fire
ox
water
ox
wood
ox
fire
ox
18
iron
sheep
water
sheep
wood
sheep
fire
sheep
earth
sheep
19 20
w ater wood
monkey bird
wood fire
monkey bird
fire earth
monkey bird
earth iron
monkey bird
iron water
monkey bird
dragon
earth
dragon
iron
dragon
water
dragon
snake
iron
snake
water
snake
wood
snake
horse
water
horse
wood
horse
fire
horse
m ouse
wood
mouse
fire
d og
iron
dog
water
d og
wood
d og
ox
fire
ox
earth
pig
iron
pig
water
pig
wood
pig
fire
pig
tiger
earth
tiger
iron
hare
iron
hare
water
Iron
dragon
ater
dragon
wood
hare
earth
snake
wood
snake
fire
horse
fire
horse
earth
sheep
earth
sheep
iron
tiger
hare
dragon
snake
horse
sheep
monkey bird
dog
pig
hare
mouse
ox
tiger
hare
dragon
snake
horse
sheep
Water
wood
tiger
fire
hare
earth
dragon
iron
snake
water
horse
wood
sheep
fire earth
monkey bird
iron
dog
water
pig
earth
tiger
iron
hare
earth
m ouse
iron
ox
water
tiger
wood
hare
fire
dragon
earth
snake
iron
horse
water
sheep
As for the relationship between the lunar day and its hours, one should know that the hours of the hare, monkey and ox form a son-
relationship with the day; those of the dragon, bird and tiger form a friend-relationship; those of the snake and dog form an enemy-
relationship; those of the horse and pig form a mother-relationship; and those of the sheep and mouse form an identity-relationship. For
example, the first two-hour period, known as daybreak or the hour of the hare, will have the destiny element wood if the destiny element
of the day is water. 89 Table 2.7 indicates the destiny elements of the hours.
2.7 Calculating the destiny elements of the twelve hours
Daily destiny
Daybreak
Sunrise
Noon
Afternoon
Twilight
Dawn
Mid-morning
(snake hour)
Late afternoon
(monkey hour)
Sunset
(bird hour)
Late evening
(pig hour)
Midnight
(mouse hour)
After midnight
(ox hour)
element
(hare hour)
(dragon hour)
(horse hour)
(sheep hour)
(dog hour)
(tiger hour)
Wood
fire
earth
iron
water
wood
fire
earth
iron
water
wood
fire
earth
Fire
earth
iron
water
wood
fire
earth
iron
water
wood
fire
earth
iron
Earth
iron
water
wood
fire
earth
iron
water
wood
fire
earth
iron
water
Iron
water
wood
fire
earth
iron
water
wood
fire
earth
iron
water
wood
Water
wood
fire
earth
iron
water
wood
fire
earth
iron
water
wood
fire
When the other elemental aspects of vitality, body and luck are calculated in respect of the months, days and hours, the method employed
resembles that already described in the section on the calculation of the elemental aspects of the years.90



63
2002
Sa
mga
ACAS
NE
272
Lo-chen summarises this topic as follows (Moonbeams, f. 13a/b):
Above Detail of Plate 2, fig. 5 (see p. 111), showing the protector
deities encircling the Black Two numeric square in the south-west
Now follows the instruction through which the destiny (elements
The third and eighth days are in an enemy-relationship,
As far as the destiny (elements) of those years
of the months, days and hours are easily determined:
The fourth and ninth days are in a mother-relationship,
months, days and hours are concerned,
Whatever the destiny element of the present year,
And the fifth and tenth days are in an identity-relationship.
They are calculated in successive pairs in the case of the years
The tiger, hare, mouse and ox [months) are in a son-relationship
As far as the hours are concerned:
and months,
with it,
Those of the hare, monkey and ox are in a son-relationship [with
And one by one in the case of the days and hours.
The dragon and snake [months) are in a friend-relationship,
the day),
The horse and sheep [months) are in an enemy-relationship,
Those of the dragon, bird and tiger are in a friend-relationship,
When the destiny element of the present year forms a
The bird and monkey (months) are in a mother-relationship,
mother-relationship,
Those of the snake and dog are in an enemy-relationship,
Those of the horse and pig are in a mother-relationship,
And the dog and pig [months) are in an identity-relationship.
[That of the month is in a son-relationship.
When the destiny element of the month forms a mother-relationship,
And those of the sheep and mouse are in an identity-relationship.
When the month is taken as the basis:
[That of the day is in a son-relationship,
Each month comprises three periods of ten days, among which
The calculation of the vitality, body and luck aspects
And when the destiny element of the day forms a mother-relationship,
The first and sixth [days) are in a son-relationship (with the month),
In respect of those [months, days and hours]
[That of the hour is in a son-relationship.
The second and seventh days are in a friend-relationship,
Are calculated in the same manner as those of the years.



92
The White Beryl
6. The nine numeric squares
Divinations may also be made on the basis of the nine numeric squares (sme-ba dgu):91 White One, Black Two, Blue Three, Green Four,
Yellow Five, White Six, Red Seven, White Eight and Red Nine. These numerals assume square formations with nine different permuta-
tions, all in base three, as illustrated on Plate 2, fig. 3. Respectively they are also known as the mirrors of the gods (deva), evil spirits ('dre),
attachment spirits (bsen-mo), serpentine spirits (nāga), spirit lords of the soil (sa-bdag), king spirits (rgyal-po), haunting spirits (btsan),
countryside deities (yul-lha)92 and imprecatory goddesses (ma-mo),99 because their predictions pertain to such classes of demonic forces;
they are additionally said to have special significance respectively for children, adult males, disabled persons, widows, Buddhist monks,
Bon priests, women, ministers and kings.
On the plate each of these nine squares is encircled by a band in which its various appropriate predictions are illus-
trated.94 Although the details of these predictions are not indicated in White Beryl at this point, some are mentioned in the context of natal
horoscope (see e.g. p. 158 below). Outside each of the nine predictive circles, the plate includes illustrations of the protector deities and
spirits asociated with each of the nine numeric squares, with the exception of Yellow Five covering the abdomen of the divination turtle.
Thus, Red Nine in the south is surrounded by imprecatory goddesses (ma-mo gtso-'khor). Black Two in the south-west is surrounded by a
cluster of thirteen evil spirits (gnam-bdur thod-pa'i phreng-can-la bdur-se bcu-gsum). Red Seven in the west is surrounded by a group of
seven haunting spirits (btsan-yab skya-bdun). White Six in the north-west is surrounded by seven unnamed king spirits, riding an ele-
phant, goat and so forth. White One in the north is surrounded by the divine, kingly serpentine spirit Ma-gros and his retinue (klu-rgyal
ma-gros gtso-'khor). White Eight in the north-east is surrounded by six mounted countryside deities (yul-lha phyva-sangs gtso-'khor),
Phyva-sangs foremost among them. Blue Three in the east is surrounded by five principal imprecatory goddesses who are spirits of
attachment (gtsor-bdag ma-mo lnga). Lastly, Green Four in the south-east is surrounded by a group of twelve subterranean mountain
goddesses comprising gNyan-chen thang-lha and her retinue (gnyan-chen thang-lha gtso-'khor). Each of these surrounding clusters, with
the exception of White Six, is captioned with a gold inscription.
Plate 2, fig. 3 (Ms I: ff. 6–12): Location of the charts of the nine numeric squares
SE
SW
White 8
Green 4
White 6
Blue 3
Black 2
White 8
Green 4
White 1
White 6
White 1
Red 9
White 6
Black 2
White 8
Green 4
Red 7
Red 9
Black 2
Red 7
Red 9
Yellow 5
Blue 3
Yellow 5
White 1
Yellow 5
Red 7
Blue 3
Green 4
Red 9
Black 2
Green 4
Black 2
E White 1
White 6
Red 7
Blue 3
White 8
White 1
Yellow 5
Green 4
White 6
Yellow 5
Black 2
Red 7
Red 9
W
Blue 3
White 8
Yellow 5
White 1
Red 7
White 6
White 1
Blue 3
White 8
Red 7
Blue 3,
Yellow 5
Red 9
Yellow 5
Red 7
Yellow 5
White 1
Blue 3
on a
White
White 8
White 6
White 8
White 1
Green 4
White 6
White 8
White 8
Green 4
White 1
White 6
Blue 3
Black 2
Black 2
Green 4
Red 9
Red 9
Black 2
Red 7
NE
NW
In terms of the five elements, the three white numeric squares symbolise iron; Black Two and Blue Three symbolise water;95 Green Four
symbolises wood; Yellow Five symbolises earth; while Red Seven and Red Nine symbolise fire. In terms of the corresponding natal year-
signs, White Eight, Black Two and Yellow Five govern the tiger, monkey, pig and snake year-signs; Red Seven, Green Four and White
One govern the mouse, horse, bird and hare year-signs; while Red Nine, White Six and Blue Three govern the ox, sheep, dog and dragon
year-signs. Among all the numeric squares, Black Two is most severe, the 'heavenly gate' (gnam-sgo)96 for males is White Six and for
females White One, while the ‘earthly gate' (sa-sgo)97 for males is Black Two and for females Green Four. These primary attributes may
be tabulated as shown in chart 2.8.
2.8 Attributes of the nine numeric squares
Numeric square
Element
Direction
Demon
Subjects
Natal year-signs
White 1
iron
north
Iha
children
mouse, horse, bird, hare
Black 2
water
south-west
'dre
adult males
tiger, monkey, pig, snake
Blue 3
water
east
bsen-mo
disabled persons
ox, sheep, dog, dragon
Green 4
wood
south-east
klu
widows
mouse, horse, bird, hare
Yellow 5
earth
centre
sa-bdag
Buddhist monks
tiger, monkey, pig, snake
White 6
north-west
rgyal-po
Bon priests
ox, sheep, dog, dragon
iron
fire
Red 7
west
women
mouse, horse, bird, hare
btsan
yul-Iha
White 8
iron
north-east
ministers
tiger, monkey, pig, snake
ox, sheep, dog, dragon
Red 9
fire
south
ma-mo
kings



93
The hidden points of the turtle divination chart
5.
Plate 2, fig. 3
AY
ADIS
094
.



94
The White Beryl
Plate 2, fig. 3: The nine numeric squares and their associated protector dieties (for colour plate see p. 23)
1 Yellow Five covers the abdomen of the divination turtle.
2 Red Nine in the Li (fire/S) sector is surrounded by five imprecatory goddesses (with gold inscription: ma-mo gtso-'khor].
3 Black Two in the Khon (earth/SW) sector is surrounded by thirteen protectors known as gNam-bdur thod-pa'i phreng-can-la bdur-se [with gold inscription: gnam-bdur thod-pa'i phreng-can-la bdur-se bcu-gsum-gyis skor-ba].
4 Red Seven in the Dva (iron/W) sector is surrounded by a group of seven haunting spirits (with gold inscription: btsan-yab skya-bdun).
5 White Six in the Khen (space/NW) sector is surrounded by seven unnamed protectors, riding an elephant, goat and so forth.
6 White One in the Kham (water/N) sector is surrounded by five serpentine nāga-kings (with gold inscription: klu-rgyal ma-gros gtso-'khor).
7 White Eight in the Gin (mountain/NE) sector is surrounded by six mounted countryside deities known as yul-Iha phya-sangs gtso-'khor (gold inscription).
8 Blue Three in the Zin (wood/E) sector is surrounded by five principal imprecatory goddesses (with gold inscription: gtsor-bdag ma-mo Inga).
9 Green Four in the Zon (air/SE) sector is surrounded a group of twelve protectors comprising gNyan-chen thang-lha and retinue [with gold inscription: gnyan-chen thang-Iha gtso-'khor).
OLI
KI
LO
0131
107
ARSR
50
Opposite Detail of Plate 2, fig. 3 (see p. 93), showing Blue Three
numeric square encircled by its predictive attributes



0)



96
The White Beryl
3
Sum
RE
SER
ECCO
RUNK
SW
The calendrical cycle of 180 years based
on the three rows of numeric squares
According to one calendrical system which has been utilised in a number of sources,98 the sexagenary cycle may be extended to 180 years
by combining each of the sixty years with a vitality numeric square (srog-gi sme-ba), a destiny numeric square (dbang-gi sme-ba) and a
body numeric square (lus-kyi sme-ba). Each sexagenary cycle comprises twenty vitality numeric squares, twenty destiny numeric squares
and twenty body numeric squares, as depicted in the second cartouches of Plates 3–8 and the uppermost cartouches of Plates 16–22.
Altogether, the 180 numeric squares are arranged into three distinct rows: the top row comprises the natal or body numeric squares, the
middle row the vitality numeric squares, and the bottom row the destiny numeric squares. The sixty natal numeric squares in the top row
extend from White One99 to Yellow Five;100 the sixty vitality numeric squares of the middle row from Green Four101 to White Eight;102
and the sixty destiny numeric squares of the bottom row from Red Seven 103 to Black Two.104 Thereafter, the calculation returns to White
One in the first house of the top row, and continues ad infinitum. It is said that if Black Two, Blue Three, Red Seven or Red Nine falls in the
top row of vitality numeric squares, it portends the ‘intermediate death-wish' (bar-gyi ro-'dod). (See the full chart on pp. 97–101.)
Calculating the numeric squares of vitality, destiny, body and luck
In any given year, the corresponding vitality numeric square is obtained by counting four places backwards, the destiny numeric square
by counting four places forwards, and the body numeric square by locating the natal numeric square with which it is identical. The luck
numeric square corresponds to the vitality numeric square of the luck sign appropriate for any of the four groups of three compatible
year-signs. 105 For example, in the case of the wood mouse year corresponding to 1684,106 where the body numeric square is White One,
the vitality numeric square, counting four places backwards, is Red Seven, the destiny numeric square, counting four places forwards, is
Green Four, and the luck numeric square corresponds to White Eight, which is the vitality numeric square of the wood tiger sign. 107



97
The hidden points of the turtle divination chart
UA
1 Wood mouse year - White 1.108 2 Wood ox year - Red 9.3 Fire tiger year - White 8.
4 Fire hare year – Red 7.
5 Earth dragon year – White 6. 6 Earth snake year – Yellow 5. 7 Iron horse year – Green 4.
8 Iron sheep year – Blue 3.
9 Water monkey year - Black 2. 10 Water bird year – White 1.11 Wood dog year - Red 9. 109
12 Wood pig year - White 8.
Opposite Detail of Plate 19, fig. 1 (see this page),
showing the years of the sexagenary cycle from
wood mouse to earth snake
The 180-year cycle
Top row Plates 16–18, fig. 1 (Ms II, ff. 1–5),
emphasising the natal numeric square
Middle row Plates 19–20, fig. 1 (Ms II, ff. 16–18),
emphasising the vitality numeric square
Bottom row Plates 21-22, fig. 1 (Ms II, ff. 25–29),
emphasising the destiny numeric square
61 Wood mouse year – Green 4. 119 62 Wood ox year – Blue 3.63 Fire tiger year – Black 2.
64 Fire hare year - White 1.120 65 Earth dragon year - Red 9.66 Earth snake year - White 8.
67 Iron horse year – Red 7.68 Iron sheep year – White 6.69 Water monkey year – Yellow 5.121
70 Water bird year – Green 4.71 Wood dog year – Blue 3.72 Wood pig year - Black 2.
YA
Du @
127 Iron horse year - White 1.128 Iron sheep year - Red 9.141 129 Water monkey year - White 8.142
121 Wood mouse year - Red 7.139 122 Wood ox year – White 6. 123 Fire tiger year - Yellow 5.
124 Fire hare year - Green 4.140 125 Earth dragon year - Blue 3. 126 Earth snake year – Black 2.
130 Water bird year – Red 7.143 131 Wood dog year - White 6.132 Wood pig year - Yellow 5.



98
The White Beryl
MA
13 Fire mouse year - Red 7. 14 Fire ox year - White 6.15 Earth tiger year – Yellow 5.
16 Earth hare year – Green 4.110
17 Iron dragon year – Blue 3. 18 Iron snake year - Black 2. 19 Water horse year - White 1.
20 Water sheep year - Red 9.111
21 Wood monkey year - White 8. 22 Wood bird year - Red 7. 23 Fire dog year - White 6.
24 Fire pig year – Yellow 5. 112
73 Fire mouse year - White 1.1 22 74 Fire ox year - Red 9.75 Earth tiger year - White 8.
76 Earth hare year - Red 7. 77 Iron Dragon Year - White 6.78 Iron snake year – Yellow 5.
79 Water horse year – Green 4.80 Water sheep year – Blue 3.123 81 Wood monkey year – Black 2. 124
82 Wood bird year - White 1.83 Fire dog year - Red 9.84 Fire pig year - White 8.125
TER
yo
133 Fire mouse year - Green 4. 144 134 Fire ox year - Blue 3.135 Earth tiger year - Black 2.
136 Earth hare year - White 1.145137 Iron dragon year - Red 9. 146 138 Iron snake year – White 8.147
139 Water horse year – Red 7. 140 Water sheep year – White 6.148 141 Wood monkey year – Yellow 5. 149
142 Wood bird year - Green 4.150 143 Fire dog year - Blue 3. 144 Fire pig year - Black 2.



99
The hidden points of the turtle divination chart
25 Earth mouse year – Green 4.26 Earth ox year - Blue 3.27 Iron tiger year - Black 2.
29 Water dragon year – Red 9. 30 Water snake year – White 8. 31 Wood horse year – Red 7.
32 Wood sheep year - White 8.113
33 Fire monkey year - Yellow 5.114 34 Fire bird year – Green 4.115 35 Earth dog year - Blue 3.
36 Earth pig year - Black 2.
28 Iron hare year - White 1.
The 180-year cycle continued
Top row Plates 16–18, fig. 1 (Ms II, ff. 1-5),
emphasising the natal numeric square
Middle row Plates 19–20, fig. 1 (Ms II, ff. 16–18),
emphasising the vitality numeric square
Bottom row Plates 21–22, fig. 1 (Ms II, ff. 25–29),
emphasising the destiny numeric square
85 Earth mouse year - Red 7. 86 Earth ox year - White 6.126 87 Iron tiger year - Yellow 5.
88 Iron hare year – Green 4.89 Water dragon year - Blue 3.127 90 Water snake year - Black 2.
91 Wood horse year - White 1.92 Wood sheep year - Red 9.128 93 Fire monkey year - White 8.
94 Fire bird year - Red 7. 129 95 Earth dog year - White 6.96 Earth pig year - Yellow 5.
ovewer
HUIS
LUNKOWO
she
151 Wood horse year – Green 4. 152 Wood sheep year - Blue 3.156 153 Fire monkey year - Black 2.
145 Earth mouse year - White 1,151 146 Earth ox year - Red 9.152 147 Iron tiger year - White 8.
148 Iron hare year - Red 7. 153149 Water dragon year - White 6.154 150 Water snake year - Yellow 5.155
154 Fire bird year – White 1.157 155 Earth dog year – Red 9. 156 Earth pig year - White 8.158



100
The White Beryl
CCC (98
45 Earth monkey year - Black 2. 46 Earth bird year - White 1.47 Iron dog year - Red 9.
37 Iron mouse year – White 1.38 Iron ox year – Red 9.39 Water tiger year - White 8.
40 Water hare year - Red 7.
41 Wood dragon year - White 6.1 16 42 Wood snake year – Yellow 5. 43 Fire horse year – Green 4.
44 Fire sheep year – Blue 3.117
48 Iron pig year – White 8.118
97 Iron mouse year – Green 4.130 98 Iron ox year - Blue 3. 99 Water tiger year - Black 2.
100 Water hare year – White 1.101 Wood dragon year – Red 9.131 102 Wood snake year – White 8.
103 Fire horse year - Red 7. 104 Fire sheep year –White 6. 105 Earth monkey year – Yellow 5.
106 Earth bird year – Green 4.132107 Iron dog year – Blue 3. 108 Iron pig year - Black 2.133
157 Iron mouse year – Red 7.159 158 Iron ox year – White 6. 160 159 Water tiger year – Yellow 5.
160 Water hare year - Green 4. 161 161 Wood dragon year – Blue 3.162 162 Wood snake year - Black 2.
163 Fire horse year - White 1.164 Fire sheep year - Red 9. 165 Earth monkey year - White 8.163
166 Earth bird year - Red 7.167 Iron dog year - White 6. 168 Iron pig year – Yellow 5. 164



101
The hidden points of the turtle divination chart
49 Water mouse year – Red 7.50 Water ox year - White 6.51 Wood tiger year – Yellow 5.
53 Fire dragon year - Blue 3.54 Fire snake year - Black 2.55 Earth horse year - White 1.
57 Iron monkey year - White 8.58 Iron bird year - Red 7.59 Water dog year - White 6.
52 Wood hare year - Green 4.
56 Earth sheep year - Red 9.
60 Water pig year - Yellow 5.
The 180-year cycle continued
Top row Plates 16–18, fig. 1 (Ms II, ff. 1-5),
Hans
emphasising the natal numeric square
Middle row Plates 19–20, fig. 1 (Ms II, ff. 16–18),
emphasising the vitality numeric square
Bottom row Plates 21-22, fig. 1 (Ms II, ff. 25–29),
emphasising the destiny numeric square
109 Water mouse year - White 1.110 Water ox year - Red 9.111 Wood tiger year - White 8.
112 Wood hare year - Red 7. 113 Fire dragon year - White 6. 114 Fire snake year – Yellow 5.134
115 Earth horse year – Green 4.135 116 Earth sheep year – Blue 3.136 117 Iron monkey year – Black 2.137
118 Iron bird year - White 1.158 119 Water dog year - Red 9. 120 Water pig year – White 8.
169 Water mouse year – Green 4. 170 Water ox year – Blue 3.171 Wood tiger year - Black 2.
172 Wood hare year - White 1.165 173 Fire dragon year - Red 9. 174 Fire snake year - White 8.
175 Earth horse year - Red 7. 176 Earth sheep year - White 6.1 66 177 Iron monkey year - Yellow 5.
178 Iron bird year - Green 4.179 Water dog year – Blue 3.180 Water pig year - Black 2.



102
The White Beryl
The nine charts with the natal numeric square at the centre
Each of the nine numerological charts depicted on Plate 2, fig. 3 is divided into nine sectors, with the natal numeric square placed at the
centre, the vitality numeric square in the south-west, the destiny numeric square in the north-east, and the body numeric square in the
centre. The colours of the sectors correspond to those of the rotational numeric squares (bskor-sme).
Of these nine charts, that with Yellow Five at the centre covers the abdomen of the turtle, that with Red Nine at
the centre is in the south or Li sector, that with Black Two at the centre is in the south-west or Khon sector, that with Red Seven at the
centre is in the west or Dva sector, that with White Six at the centre is in the north-west or Khen sector, that with White One at the
centre is in the north or Kham sector, that with White Eight at the centre is in the north-east or Gin sector, that with Blue Three at the
centre is in the east or Zin sector, and that with Green Four at the centre is in the south-east or Zon sector.167
The zigzagging motion of consecutive calculation
When calculations are made consecutively within any of the nine charts, the sequence of the count is said to resemble the zigzagging
‘flight of a bird'. For example, in the case of the central chart, which has Yellow Five at its centre, one zigzags or hops consecutively from
Yellow Five to the space sector in the north-west (White Six), the iron sector in the west (Red Seven), the mountain sector in the north-
east (White Eight), the fire sector in the south (Red Nine), the water sector in the north (White One), the earth sector in the south-west
(Black Two), the wood sector in the east (Blue Three), the air sector in the south-east (Green Four), and thence back to the centre. In the
case of each of the other eight charts, the calculation also begins from whichever numeric square occupies the centre and zigzags through
the same consecutive sequence to arrive finally back at the centre. Table 2.9 is an exemplary chart with Yellow Five at the centre, show-
ing the sequence of the zigzagging calculation.
2.9 Exemplary chart
SE
SW
9 Green 4
5 Red 9
7 Black 2
8 Blue 3
1 Yellow 5
3 Red 7
4 White 8
6 White 1
2 White 6
NE
NW
Calculation of the subject's natal numeric square (skye-sme)
To ascertain the natal numeric square, one should place the numeric square of the present year at the centre,168 and then count back the
subject's age in tens, following the aforementioned zigzagging bird-like sequence of calculation, and then finally subtract any integers
less than ten individually. Alternatively, one should place the number corresponding to the subject's present age at the centre along with
the numeric square of the present year and count forwards into the next sexagenary cycle. Such calculations are obviated by the previ-
ously depicted charts, which show the correspondence between the natal numeric squares and the natal years of the sexagenary cycle. 169
Calculation of the subject's current numeric square (babs-sme)
Since the natal numeric square is identified with the numeric square at the centre of each chart, the numeric square corresponding to the
subject's present age (babs-sme) can also be calculated by counting consecutively through the nine sectors in eight successive steps. First
one should select the chart with the appropriate natal numeric square at its centre. At the beginning of the count, one moves directly east
from the centre, and then continues in an anti-clockwise sequence in the case of persons born in one of the six male years (mouse, tiger,
dragon, horse, monkey or dog) or in a clockwise sequence in the case of persons born in one of the six female years (ox, hare, snake, sheep,
bird or pig). On the completion of one circuit the calculation returns to the centre, and so on until the desired numeric square correspon-
ding to the subject's present age is eventually obtained. 170 This means that one can conveniently count the ages one, ten, nineteen,
twenty-eight, thirty-seven, forty-six, fifty-five, sixty-four, seventy-three, eighty-two and ninety-one sequentially in the central sec-
tor. 171 Once the current numeric square has been obtained, it may then be compared to the natal numeric square for predictive purposes.
Table 2.10 indicates how the current numeric square may be calculated for model male and female years.
2.10 Calculating the current numeric square
Sequence for male years
age 9
age 2
age 8
age 1
age 4
age 7
age 6
age 5
age 3
Sequence for female years
age 3 age 4 age 5
age 2 age 1 age 6
age 9
age 8
age 7



103
The hidden points of the turtle divination chart
Table 2.11 indicates the current numeric squares for subjects of varying age when the natal numeric square is known.
2.11 The current numeric square for subjects of various ages
Natal
Male/
Ages
Ages
Ages
Ages
numeric
Ages
1, 10, 19, 28, 37,
46, 55, 64, 73, 82
female
Ages
3,12, 21, 30, 39,
48,57, 66, 75, 84
Ages
9, 18, 27, 36, 45,
5, 14, 23, 32, 41,
2, 11, 20, 29, 38,
47,56, 63, 74,83
Red 7
4,13, 23, 31, 40,
49, 58, 67, 76,85
Ages
7, 16, 25, 34, 43,
52,61, 70, 79, 88
6,15, 24, 33, 42,
51, 60, 69, 78, 87
Ages
8, 17, 26, 35, 44,
53, 62, 71, 80, 89
square
year
50, 59, 68, 77,86
54,63, 72, 81, 90
Red 9
male
Red 9
Blue 3
Yellow 5
White 1
Black 2
White 6
Green 4
White 8
female
Red 9
Red 7
White 8
Green 4
White 6
Black 2
White 1
Yellow 5
Blue 3
White 8
male
White 8
White 6
Black 2
Green 4
Red 9
White 1
Yellow 5
Blue 3
Red 7
female
White 8
White 6
Red 7
Blue 3
Yellow 5
White 1
Red 9
Green 4
Black 2
Red 7
male
Red 7
Yellow 5
White 1
Blue 3
White 8
Red 9
Green 4
Black 2
White 6
female
Red 7
Yellow 5
White 6
Black 2
Green 4
Red 9
White 8
Blue 3
White 1
White 6
male
White 6
Green 4
Red 9
Black 2
Red 7
White 8
Blue 3
White 1
Yellow 5
female
White 6
Green 4
Yellow 5
White 1
Blue 3
White 8
Red 7
Black 2
Red 9
Yellow 5
male
Yellow 5
Blue 3
White 8
White 1
White 6
Red 7
Black 2
Red 9
Green 4
female
Yellow 5
Blue 3
Green 4
Red 9
Black 2
Red 7
White 6
White 1
White 8
Green 4
male
Green 4
Black 2
Red 7
Red 9
Yellow 5
White 6
White 1
White 8
Blue 3
female
Green 4
Black 2
Blue 3
White 8
White 1
White 6
Yellow 5
Red 9
Red 7
Blue 3
male
Blue 3
White 1
White 6
White 8
Green 4
Yellow 5
Red 9
Red 7
Black 2
female
Blue 3
White 1
Black 2
Red 7
Red 9
Yellow 5
Green 4
White 8
White 6
Black 2
male
Black 2
Red 9
Yellow 5
Red 7
Blue 3
Green 4
White 8
White 6
White 1
female
Black 2
Red 9
White 1
White 6
White 8
Green 4
Blue 3
Red 7
Yellow 5
White 1
male
White 1
White 8
Green 4
White 6
Black 2
Blue 3
Red 7
Yellow 5
Red 9
female
White 1
White 8
Red 9
Yellow 5
Red 7
Blue 3
Black 2
White 6
Green 4
Calculation of the numeric squares of the days and hours
As well as the cycle of 180 years, the nine numeric squares are also used for calculating the calendar days of the month, as depicted on
Plate 1, fig. 7. Accordingly, White One coincides with the first calendar day of each of the four first seasonal months (tiger, monkey, pig,
snake), Green Four with the first calendar day of each of the four mid-seasonal months (mouse, horse, bird, hare) and Red Seven with the
first calendar day of each of the four last seasonal months (ox, sheep, dog, dragon). 172 The numerals are then counted sequentially corre-
sponding to the calendar days of the month in question.173 In the case of a doubled day (lhag), the previous numeric square is repeated, but
an omitted day (chad) is taken into account.
In addition, the hours of each calendar day may be counted according to the nine numeric squares when they are
regrouped into the so-called nine daytime phases and nine night-time phases.
Plate 1, fig. 7
pig (first winter/8th lunar month)
snake (first summer/2nd lunar month)
Plate 1, fig. 7 (Ms 1: ff. 3–4): Numeric squares (sme-ba) corresponding to the [first day of the] seasonal months (zla-ba)
White 1 tiger (first spring/11th lunar month)
monkey (first autumn/5th lunar month)
Green 4 mouse (middle winter/9th lunar month) horse (middle summer/3rd lunar month)
Red 7
ox (last winter/10th lunar month)
sheep (last summer/4th lunar month)
hare (middle spring/12th lunar month)
bird (middle autumn/6th lunar month)
dog (last autumn/7th lunar month)
dragon (last spring/1st lunar month)



104
The White Beryl
Odd- and even-numbered numeric squares
Finally, just as the animal signs are designated as odd, even and irregularly numbered for the sake of certain computations, here too the
numeric squares symbolising fire (Red 7 and Red 9), iron (White 1, White 6 and White 8) and water (Black 2, Blue 3) may be designated as
even-numbered or ‘goat-horns', while those symbolising earth (Yellow 5) and wood (Green 4) are termed odd-numbered “rhino-horns”. 174
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises this numerological divination technique in the following verses (Moonbeams, ff. 8b-11a):
Third, concerning the nine numeric squares (sme-ba dgu):
When these aspects are examined
If one wishes to find the natal numeric square easily,
in terms of the nine sectors [of the numerological chart),
White One, Black Two, Blue Three, Green Four, Yellow Five,
White Six, Red Seven, White Eight and Red Nine
The numeric square of the present year should be placed in the centre,
Then, one should count back the years [of one's age] in tens, starting therefrom,
The natal numeric square is placed at the centre,
Are respectively known as the mirrors of the gods, evil spirits, attachment
So that the vitality (numeric square) is located in the south-west,
Circuiting the numeric squares in the manner of a bird in flight.
spirits, serpentine spirits, spirit lords of the soil, king spirits, haunting spirits,
The destiny (numeric square) in the north-east,
Each numeric square represents ten [years),
countryside deities and imprecatory goddesses.
And the body (numeric square) in the centre.
And any [integers) less than ten
Should then be deducted individually.
The three white (numeric squares] symbolise iron,
The nine sectors are multicoloured
Black Two and Blue Three symbolise water,
Corresponding to the rotational numeric squares:
Alternatively, one's present age is fixed in the central sector,
Green Four symbolises wood,
[The chart with] Yellow Five [in the centre]
Along with the numeric square of the present year.
Yellow Five symbolises earth,
covers the abdomen of the turtle.
Then, one should count forwards
And Red Seven and Red Nine symbolise fire.
The number of years that have not yet passed
[until a full sixty-year cycle has been completed],
[The chart with] Red Nine [in the centre) is in the Li sector,
[That with] Black Two [in the centre) is in the Khon sector.
[That with] Red Seven [in the centre) is in the Dva sector,
[That with White] Six [in the centre) is in the Khen sector.
White Eight, Black Two and Yellow Five rule the tiger, monkey, pig and snake (natal] year-signs,
And which are not fixed in the central sector,
Red Seven, Green Four and White One rule the mouse, horse, bird and hare (natal] year-signs,
Starting from the numeric square of the present year.
While Red Nine, White Six and Blue Three rule the ox, sheep, dog and dragon (natal] year-signs.
[That with] White One [in the centre) is in the Kham sector,
So, wherever one ends up,
[That with] White Eight [in the centre) is in the Gin sector.
There will be no uncertainty as to the natal numeric square.
Now, in this context, the sixty-year cycle (10-rgan) is differentiated
[That with] Blue Three [in the centre) is in the Zin sector,
And (that with] Green Four (in the centre) is in the Zon sector.
According to vitality, body and destiny (numeric squares),
So that there are three rows of sixty numeric squares,
Amounting to one hundred and eighty.
The sequence [of calculation] resembles the flight of a bird:
[The numeric squares) are also designated as even 'goat-horns',
Odd 'rhino-horns', and so forth.
Those symbolising fire, iron and water are termed 'goat-horns',
While those symbolising earth and wood are rhino-horns';
And if the black, blue and two red (numeric squares) fall in the top [row], 176
This is termed the 'intermediate death-wish' (bar-gyi ro-'dod).
This is why (the numeric squares) are known as the 'cycle of eighty' (brgyad-cu skor).
Starting from the [yellow chart) in the centre,
[Then zigzagging consecutively] to the space sector (in the NW],
Starting from White One in the top row of numeric squares,
Once the calculation of sixty is completed (in the top row],
The iron sector [in the W], the mountain sector [in the NE],
The fire sector (in the S], the water sector [in the N],
One arrives at Yellow] Five.
The earth sector [in the SW), the wood sector [in the E],
Then, counting from [Green] Four in the middle row,
The air sector [in the SE), and thence back to the centre.
The numeric squares in succession, starting from White One,
[Are also said to have special significance), respectively
For children, adult males, disabled persons, widows,
The calculation is completed at [White] Eight.
[To ascertain the subject's current numeric square]
Buddhist monks, Bon-pos, women, ministers and kings.
Then, counting from [Red] Seven in the bottom row,
The calculation is completed at [Black] Two
The natal numeric square is fixed in the centre [of each chart),
After which, one then returns to [White] One in the first house of the top row.
And then in the manner of a bird's flight,
Black Two is so-called because it is severe.
In this way the computation can continue ad infinitum.
The heavenly gate for males is (White) Six, and for females White One.
[One zigzags through] the nine numeric squares,
[Counting them according to] the nine [age categories) in eight successive [movements). 175
The earthly gate for males is [Black] Two, and for females Green Four.
Now, the vitality numeric square is counted four places backwards,
In this way, the ages one, ten, nineteen, twenty-eight, thirty-seven,
The destiny numeric square four places forwards,
Forty-six, fifty-five, sixty-four, seventy-three, eighty-two and ninety-one
The body (numeric square] corresponds to the natal (numeric square),
Are (sequentially) fixed in the central sector.
The first] day of each of the four first seasonal months corresponds to White One,
The (first] day of each of the four mid-seasonal months corresponds to Green Four,
And the (first] day of each of the four last seasonal months corresponds to Red Seven
By following these sequences, one may compute the days [of the month].
And [the numeric square of the luck aspect]
Corresponds to the vitality numeric square of the luck sign
The [initial] computation extends due eastwards from the centre,
Appropriate for the [four groups of three compatible years.
And then the numeric squares are counted,
In an anti-clockwise sequence in the case of
The numeric squares indicative of these calendar days are also applied sequentially
For example, in the case of the present wood mouse year,
[those born in one of the six male years,
To the [hours) of the day and night, [subdivided into]
When the body numeric square coincides with White One,
Nine daytime phases and nine night-time phases.
And in a clockwise sequence in the case of
[those born in one of the six female years.
The vitality numeric square, [counting] four places backwards, is Red Seven,
The destiny numeric square, [counting] four places forwards, is Green Four,
And the luck numeric square corresponds to [Black Two),
After each of these respective [computations),
Which is the vitality numeric square of the wood tiger sign.
The calculation returns from the end to the centre.
By repeating this bird-like motion from the centre,
One should come to recognise the current numeric square (babs-sme).
Opposite Detail of Plate 2, fig. 5 (see p. 111), showing the planet Mars,
the fire goddess, and the protector Lho'i 'byung sngon-mo above the
head of the divination turtle



106
The White Beryl
7. The eight trigrams
The charts of the eight trigrams (spar-kha brgyad)177 are all depicted on the body of the divinatory turtle (see Plate 2, fig. 2, shown below).
Li, representing fire, is in the south; Khon, representing earth, is in the south-west; Dva, representing iron, is in the west; Khen, repre-
senting heaven or space, is in the north-west; Kham, representing water, is in the north; Gin, representing mountain, is in the north-east;
Zin, representing wood, is in the east; and Zon, representing air, is in the south-east. The trigrams symbolic of heaven/space, mountains
and air are sometimes subsumed within the earth element, for which reason these four are all depicted as yellow.
The classification of relationships formed between the trigrams
Each of the trigrams is surrounded by four auspicious and four inauspicious sectors, which indicate by their layout and direction the cor-
responding auspicious and inauspicious relationships that a given trigram forms with the other trigrams. The chart opposite, which
reflects Plate 2, fig. 2, clearly illustrates these eight sectors in the case of each of the eight trigrams.
VVO
SN
20
Plate 2, fig. 2
STIGE
fen!
L
EIRE
VIETUIT
19



107
The hidden points of the turtle divination chart
Plate 2, fig. 2 (Ms l: ff. 7-9): Location of the eight trigram charts on the divination turtle (head to south and tail to north)
SE
SW
intimation of luck
growth through glory
five demons
intimation of luck
corporal punishment
five demons
intimation of luck
growth through glory
sustaining vitality
corporal punishment
Khon
heavenly medicine
Zon
corporal punishment
five demons
harm
growth through glory
cutting influence of demons
Sustaining vitality
harm
harm
heavenly medicine
cutting influence of demons
sustaining vitality
cutting influence of demons
heavenly medicine
heavenly medicine
sustaining vitality
harm
corporal punishment
five demons
growth through glory
E
intimation of luck
Zin
cutting influence of demons
ence of demons
Dva
intimation of luck
corporal punishment
growth through glory
five demons
heavenly medicine
harm
sustaining vitality
cutting influence of demons
h arm
sustaining vitality
heavenly medicine
cutting influence of demons
harm
cutting influence of demons
heavenly medicine
sustaining vitality
heavenly medicine
corporal punishment
Gin
growth through glory
Kham
harm
five demons
sustaining vitality
Khen
corporal punishment
intimation of luck
five demons
growth through glory
five demons
intimation of luck
corporal punishment
growth through glory
intimation of luck
NE
NW
Pairs of trigrams form diverse types of relationship. Altogether there are four auspicious, one neutral, and four inauspicious sorts of rela-
tionship, and these have been categorised as follows. The best class of the best relationships, known as 'heavenly medicine”, 178 is formed
by Li and Kham, Khen and Khon, Dva and Gin, or Zin and Zon. The mediocre class of the best relationships, known as “sustaining vital-
ity', 179 is formed by Li and Zin, Kham and Zon, Dva and Khen, or Gin and Khon. The worst class of the best relationships, known as
‘growth through glory', 180 is formed by Zon and Li, Khon and Dva, Gin and Khen, or Kham and Zin. The best class of mediocre relation-
ships, known as “intimation of luck’,181 is formed by Dva and Li, or Khen and Gin. The neutral or mediocre class of mediocre relation-
ships, known as “average luck’,182 is formed by Khon and Kham, or Zin and Zon. The worst class of mediocre relationships, known as
‘harm’,189 is formed by Li and Gin, Zon and Khen, Dva and Kham, or Zin and Khon.
As for the inauspicious relationships, the best class of worst relationships, known as the 'five demons’,184 is
formed by Dva and Li, Khon and Zon, Khen and Zin, or Gin and Kham. The mediocre class of worst relationships, known as 'cutting
influence of demons',185 is formed by Li and Khen, Dva and Zin, Khon and Kham, or Gin and Zon; and the worst class of worst relation-
ships, known as “corporal punishment, 186 is formed by Khen and Kham, Li and Khon, Zon and Dva, or Zin and Gin. 187
The relationship known as “heavenly medicine' suggests good health, ‘sustaining vitality' suggests enhancement
of the vitality element or the life-essence, 'growth through glory' suggests an increase in good fortune, while ‘intimation of luck’ is
favourable for journeys. The neutral portent of‘average luck' suggests the status quo, whereas ‘harm' portends an accident, 'five demons'
portends demonic possession, 'cutting influence of demons' portends danger to the life-spirit, and corporal punishment' augurs ill for a
particular part of the body. The four inauspicious types of relationship can be nullified through rites which exorcise demonic forces,
ransom the life-spirit from death and restore its vitality.
Surrounding each of these trigram charts (see Plate 2, fig. 2), are scenes depicting fifteen to twenty distinct div-
ination readings. For example, in the case of the Li trigram, the dangerous time is autumn when the grasslands are turning yellow. One
should abandon work connected with fire, along with red materials or clothing. One should not partake of the flesh of the head of any ani-
mal, or accept food offered by a widow, a son or sister who lives elsewhere. Also, one should not buy horses, turquoises or sheepskins. The
remedy is to propitiate Amitāyus or Prajñāpāramitā, or to recite the dBang-phyug-gi mdo.
Calculation of the subject's current trigram
In order to calculate the current trigram (babs-spar) corresponding to a subject's present age, in the case of male subjects one should
count clockwise starting from Li, and in the case of female subjects one should count anti-clockwise starting from Kham. Counting
through each of the eight trigrams in turn, after reaching the number ten, one should take a diagonal leap and continue counting in a
clockwise or anti-clockwise direction, as appropriate.188 Eventually one will obtain the trigram corresponding to the subject's current
age. If in the case of a male subject the calculation of the current trigram coincides with Li, and in the case of a woman it coincides with
Kham, this is known as the ‘inner death-wish' (nang-gi ro-'dod).
Calculation of the subject's natal trigram
The natal trigram (skye-spar) is that associated with the mother's luck element. To verify this, subtract the age of the child from that of the
mother, and add one to the remainder. Starting from Kham, count anti-clockwise in the above manner through to the current trigram of
the mother corresponding to that number, and it will be identical to the child's natal trigram. For example, if the mother is aged fifty-one
and the child eighteen, the difference is thirty-three, to which one is added. One then counts anti-clockwise from Kham, taking a diagonal
leap from Khen to Zon at the count of ten, and continuing on until reaching the number thirty-four, which coincides with the trigram Li.
This is the child's natal trigram, associated with the luck element of the mother.
Calculation of earthly, heavenly and adversarial gates in trigrams
In general, the heavenly gate' coincides with Khen and the ‘earthly gate' with Khon. More specifically, the 'heavenly gate' refers to a
resulting trigram that has a mother-relationship with the subject's vitality element, the earthly gate' to one that has a son-relationship,
and the ‘adversarial gate' (gshed-sgo) to one that has an enemy-relationship. 189
Metaphors for the trigrams
When divinatory readings are made pertaining to the trigrams a distinctive terminology is used. The term ‘goat-horns' refers to the
trigrams of the four cardinal directions, and the term ‘rhino-horns' to those of the intermediate directions. 190 In addition, the trigrams
of the four cardinal directions (phyogs-bzhi) are known as the “four looking eyes' (blta-ba'i mig bzhi); the trigrams of the four corners
(zur-bzhi) or intermediate directions (mtshams-bzhi) are known as the 'four beating horns' (brdungs-rva bzhi); the trigrams Li, Kham,
Gin and Zon are known as the 'four Buddhist monks' (ban-bzhi); while the trigrams Khen, Khon, Zin and Dva are known as the 'four
Bon priests' (bon bzhi). 191



108
The White Beryl
The calculation of calendar days and hours in trigrams
The trigrams are additionally associated with the calendar days of the month, and may be used for making such calculations, as illus-
trated on Plate 1, fig. 6. For example, the first calendar day of the tiger, horse or dog months is identified with Li; the first calendar day of
the mouse, dragon or monkey months with Kham; the first calendar day of the bird, ox or snake months with Dva; and the first calendar
day of the pig, sheep or hare months with Zin. 192 The names of the trigrams may also be applied to the hours of the calendar day, divided
into eight daytime phases and eight night-time phases.
Plate 1, fig. 6 (Ms 1: f. 3): Trigrams (spar-kha) used for calculating the [first] calendar day of the lunar month
Li t iger month horse month dog month
Zin pig month sheep month hare month
Kham mouse month dragon month monkey month
Dva bird month ox month snake month
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises the function of the eight trigrams in the following verses (Moonbeams, ff. 11a-12a):
Fourth are the eight trigrams:
The term ‘goat-horns' here refers to the four cardinal directions,
Moving successively clockwise from the south,
And the term 'rhino-horns' to the intermediate directions.
Are the eight trigrams:
When, in the case of a man, the calculation falls on Li,
Li representing fire, Khon representing earth,
And in the case of a woman, it falls on Kham,
Dva representing iron, Khen representing space,
This is known as the 'inner death-wish'.
Kham representing water, Gin representing mountain,
BAD
Zin representing wood, and Zon representing air.
When the result [of the divination takes effect),
When these are subsumed within the five elements,
The following names are also known to be applied [to the trigrams]:
Space, mountain and air are also considered as earth.
The 'four looking eyes' (blta-ba'i mig bzh),
TE
In the case of males, (the current trigram] is computed (clockwise) from Li
SITE
The 'four beating horns' (brdungs-rva bzh),
The 'four Buddhist monks' (ban-bzh),
The 'four Bon priests' (bon bzh), and so forth.
towards Khon,
GE
And in the case of females, (anti-clockwise) from Kham towards Khen.
Each of these is computed in turn, counting to ten;
The 'heavenly gate' is in Khen and the 'earthly gate' in Khon.
Plate 1, fig. 6
And on reaching ten, one takes a diagonal leap.
That is the general [description).
In particular, the 'heavenly gate' refers to the resulting trigram
Which has a mother-relationship with the vitality of the divination subject.
These trigrams [form pairs), with four kinds of auspicious, [one neutral],
And four kinds of inauspicious relationships:
The 'earthly gate' refers to the one which has a son-relationship,
The best class of the best [relationships), that of 'heavenly medicine',
And the 'adversarial gate' to one which has an enemy-relationship.
Is formed by Li and Kham, Khen and Khon, Dva and Gin, Zin and Zon.
The mediocre class of the best [relationships), that of sustaining vitality',
The trigram indicative of the year] in which a child is born
Is the one associated with the mother's luck aspect. 198
Is formed by Li and Zin, Kham and Zon, Dva and Khen, Gin and Khon.
The worst class of the best [relationships), that of 'growth through glory',
If one wishes to find this easily,
Is formed by [the trigrams of air and fire, earth and iron, mountain and space,
Subtract the age of the child from that of the mother,
water and wood.
And add one to the remainder.
The best class of the mediocre [relationships), that of 'intimation of luck',
Compute through to the trigram of the mother corresponding to that number,
Is formed by [the trigrams of iron and fire, space and mountain.
And the trigram on which the mother's calculation alights
The mediocre class of mediocre [relationships), that of 'average luck',
Is the natal trigram of that child.
Is formed by [the trigrams of earth and water, wood and air.
The worst class of mediocre [relationships), that of 'harm',
Is formed by [the trigrams of] fire and mountain, air and space, iron and water,
wood and earth
The (first] day of the tiger, horse or dog [months) is identified with Li,
The (first] day of the mouse, dragon or monkey [months] with Kham,
The (first] day of the bird, ox or snake [months] with Dva.
And the [first] day of the pig, sheep or hare [months] with Zin.
By counting successively through these,
One arrives at the trigram associated with] the days.
The best class of worst [relationships), that of the 'five demons',
Is formed by [the trigrams of iron and fire, earth and air, space and wood,
mountain and water.
The mediocre class of worst [relationships), that of cutting influence of demons',
Is formed by Li and Khen, Dva and Zin, Khon and Kham, Gin and Zon.
The trigrams indicative of these calendar days are also applied sequentially
The worst class of worst [relationships), that of corporal punishment'
Is formed by [the trigrams of space and water, fire and earth, air and iron,
To the [hours) of the day and night, [subdivided into]
Eight daytime phases and eight night-time phases.
wood and mountain.
[The last four] are the four inauspicious relationships.
8. The eight planets governing the weekdays
The ‘eight planets' (gza'-brgyad) 194 are known throughout the Indian and Chinese traditions and give their names to the days of the week.
They comprise the Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn, after whom the days Sunday through to Saturday are respec-
tively named, along with Rahu, the eclipser, who infiltrates all the other seven. Though they feature prominently in Indian astrology
(dkar-rtsis) along with the twenty-eight constellations (rgyu-skar nyer-brgyad), they are also utilised in elemental divination. The distinc-
tion is that whereas in Indian astrology calculations are made on the basis of the apparent movement of planets and constellations along
the elliptic, here divination is determined by the elemental relationships formed by the planets and constellations. These may be known
by comprehending the directions with which the planets and constellations are naturally affiliated.



109
The hidden points of the turtle divination chart
Accordingly, as depicted below on Plate 2, fig. 5 (see p. 111), the Sun and Mars represent fire, and have power over the south. The Moon
and Mercury represent water, and have power over the north. Jupiter represents wood and has power over the east. Venus represents
iron and has power over the west. Saturn represents earth, and has power over the intermediate directions.
Outer, intermediate and inner planetary aspects
These planets are said to form outer, intermediate and inner aspects when they respectively govern the sexagenary cycle, the twelve-
year cycle and the eight trigrams. In the first case, Saturn rules the twenty-eight earth and iron years, Jupiter the twelve wood years,
Mars the twelve fire years and Mercury the twelve water years. In the second case, Mars rules the mouse, dragon and monkey years;
Jupiter the bird, ox and snake years; Saturn the tiger, horse and dog years; and Mercury the pig, sheep and hare years. In the third case,
Saturn is the planet corresponding to Li and Kham in the case of male subjects, and Mars in the case of female subjects. Mars is the planet
corresponding to Dva and Zin in the case of male subjects, and Saturn in the case of female subjects. Jupiter is the planet corresponding to
Khen and Zon in the case of male subjects, and Mercury in the case of female subjects. Mercury is the planet corresponding to Gin and
Khon in the case of male subjects, and Jupiter in the case of females. Table 2.12 illustrates all these correspondences.
Sexagenary years
Animal signs
Trigrams
2.12 Influences of the 'eight planets'
Planets Weekdays Elements Directions
Sun Sunday
fire
south
Moon Monday water north
Mars Tuesday fire
south
12 fire years
mouse, dragon, monkey
Dva/Zin or Li/Kham
Mercury
Wednesday
water
north
12 water years
pig, sheep, hare
Gin/Khon or Khen/Zon
Jupiter
east
12 wood years
bird, ox, snake
Khen/Zon or Gin/Khon
Venus
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
west
wood
iron
earth
ΑΙΙ
Saturn
28 earth/iron years
tiger, horse, dog
Li/Kham or Dva/Zin
SE, SW, NE, NW
ΑΙΙ
Rahu
All
All
All
Calculation of calendar days in planets
The planets may also be utilised for counting the calendar days of the lunar month. In the case of the tiger, horse and dog months, the
first day is counted from Saturn; in the case of the mouse, dragon and monkey months, the first day is counted from Mars. In the case
of the pig, sheep and hare months, the first day is counted from the Moon. Finally, in the case of the bird, ox and snake months, the
first day is counted from Jupiter. This cycle therefore recurs on the first, eighth, fifteenth, twenty-second and twenty-ninth days of
the lunar month.
If the planet corresponding to any given day forms a son-relationship with the month, it suggests the best growth
prognosis (dar); ifit forms a mother-relationship, it suggests a mediocre prognosis (zhud); if it forms an enemy-relationship, it portends a
disturbing inferior prognosis (gyod); and if it forms a friend-relationship, it portends the worst prognosis of decline (gud).195
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises this topic as follows (Moonbeams, ff. 13b-14b):
Eighth are the eight planets (giving their names to the weekdays]:
Moreover, concerning the details of these designated planets:
Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, Saturn and Rahu.
There are outer, inner and intermediate planetary aspects.
The Sun and Mars represent fire, and have power over the south.
The outer planetary aspects [are calculated) in the context
The Moon and Mercury represent water, and have power over the north.
of the sixty-year cycle:
Saturn rules the earth and iron years,
Jupiter represents wood and has power over the east,
Venus represents iron and has power over the west,
Jupiter the wood years, Mars the fire years,
Saturn represents earth and has power over the intermediate directions.
And Mercury the twelve water years.
Rahu represents all the five elements inclusively.
However it says in the dMar-chung sTag-mgo,
That Jupiter and Saturn are reversed. 196
The intermediate planetary aspects [are calculated) in the context
of the twelve-year cycle:
Mars rules the mouse, dragon and monkey years,
In the case of tiger, horse and dog [months),
The [first] day (is counted) from Saturn.
In the case of mouse, dragon and monkey [months),
The [first] day (is counted] from Mars.
In the case of pig, sheep and hare (months),
The (first] day (is counted] from the Moon.
In the case of bird, ox and snake [months),
The [first] day (is counted] from Jupiter.
Jupiter the bird, ox and snake years,
Saturn the tiger, horse and dog years,
And Mercury the pig, sheep and hare years.
The inner planetary aspects [are calculated) in the context of the eight trigrams:
Saturn is the planet corresponding to Li and Kham in the case of males,
And Mars in the case of females.
Mars is the planet corresponding to Dva and Zin in the case of males,
On any of these days (of the month),
[If the designated planet has] a son-relationship,
It suggests (the best] prognosis of growth,
While a mother-relationship suggests a lean [mediocre) prognosis,
An enemy-relationship suggests a disturbing (mediocre] prognosis,
And a friend-relationship suggests an [inferior) prognosis of decline.
And Saturn in the case of females.
Jupiter is the planet corresponding to Khen and Zon in the case of males,
And Mercury in the case of females.
Mercury is the planet corresponding to Gin and Khon in the case of males,
[This cycle of the planets) recurs on the first, eighth, fifteenth,
And Jupiter in the case of females.
twenty-second and twenty-ninth days [of the month).



110
The White Beryl
9. The twenty-eight constellations
The twenty-eight constellations (rgyu-skar nyer-brgyad),197 like the eight planets, are found in both the Chinese and Indian traditions.
Their anthropomorphic forms are depicted on Plate 2, fig. 5. Of these, the six eastern constellations, symbolising wood, comprise
Krttikā (smin-drug, Pleiades), Rohiņī (snar-ma; Aldebaran), Mrgaśiras (mgo; Orion a), Ārdrā (lag, Orion a), Punarvasū (nabs-so; Pollux)
and Pusyā (rgyal; Cancer 8). The south-eastern constellation, symbolising earth, is Aśleşā (skag, Hydrae a). The six southern constella-
tions, symbolising fire, are Maghā (mchu; Regulus), Pūrvaphalgunī (gre; Zosma), Uttaraphalguņī Denebola), Hasrā (me-bzhi; Algorab),
Citrā (nag, Spica) and Svāti (sa-ri; Arcturus). The south-western constellation, symbolising earth, is Višākhā (sa-ga; Librae a). The six
western constellations, symbolising iron, are Anurādhā (Iha-mtshams; Iridis), Jyesthā (snron; Antares), Mūlā (snrubs; Schaula), Pūrvāsādhā
(chu-stod; Sagitarii d), Uttarāsādhā (chu-smad; Pelagus) and Abhijit (gro-zhun; Vega). The north-western constellation is Śravaņā (byi-
zhin; Altair). The six northern constellations, symbolising water, are Dhanasta (mon-dre; Delphinium B), Šatavisā (mon-gru; Aquarii a),
Pūrvabhadrapada (khrums-stod; Pegasi a), Uttarabhadrapada (khrums-smad; Pegasi y and Andromeda a), Revati (nam-gru; Piscum o) and
Asvinī (dbyug-gu; Arietis ß). The north-eastern constellation, symbolising earth, is Bharaṇī (bra-nye; Arietis 35).
Plate 2, fig. 5 (Ms l: ff. 7-11). The nine planets, twenty-eight constellations, elemental goddesses and directional protectors
(Nos 1-12 illustrate the twelve animal signs indicative of the years, months, days and hours, on which see above, p. 66.)
East The constellations Krttikā (smin-drug) (13), Rohiņi (snar-ma) (14) and Mrgasiras (mgo) (15) around the tiger (3); Jupiter (gza' phur-bu) (16) and the eastern protector Shar byi-stag skya-bo (17); with Wood Goddess
(shing-gi Iha-mo) (18) above; and the constellations Ardrā (lag) (19), Punarvasū (nabs-so) (20) and Pușyā (rgyal) (21) around the hare (4).
South-east Sun (gza' nyi-ma) (22), Earth Goddess (sa'i Iha-mo) (23); and the south-eastern constellation Aśleşā (skag) (24) around the dragon (5).
South The constellations Maghā (mchu) (25), Pūrvaphalguņi (gre) (26) and Uttaraphalguņi (dbo) (27) around the snake (6); Mars (mig-dman) (28) with Fire Goddess (Iho'i Iha-mo) (29) and the protector Lho'i 'byug
sngon-mo (30); and the constellations Hasrā (me-bzh) (31), Citrā (nag) (32) and Svāti (sa-ri) (33) around the horse (7).
South-west Rahu (ra-hu) (34); Earth Goddess (sa'i Iha-mo) (35); and the south-western constellation Viśākhā (sa-ga) (36) around the sheep (8).
West The constellations Anurādhā (Iha-mtshams) (37), Jyeșthā (snron) (38) and Mūlā (snrubs) (39) around the monkey (9); Venus (gza' pa-sangs) (40); Iron Goddess (Icags-kyi Iha-mo) (41) and the western protector
named Nub-kyi bya dmar-mo (42); and the constellations Pūrvāsādhā (chu-stod) (43), Uttarāsādhā (chu-smad) (44) and Abhijit (gro-bzhin) (45) around the bird (10).
North-west Saturn (gza' spen-ba) (46), Earth Goddess (sa'i lh-mo) (47) and the north-western constellation Śravaņā (byi-zhin) (48) around the dog (11).
North The constellations Dhanasta (mon-dre) (49), Šatavisā (mon-gru) (50) and Pūrvabhadrapada (khrums-stod) (51around the pig (12); the Moon (gza' zla-ba) (52) with Water Goddess (chu'i Iha-mo) (53) and the
northern protector Byang-gi rus-sbal ser-po (54) above the tail; and the constellations Uttarabhadrapada (khrums-smad) (55), Revati (nam-gru) (56) and Aśvinī (tha-skar) (57) around the mouse (1).
North-east Mercury (gza' lhag-pa) (58), Earth Goddess (sa'i lha-mo) (59); and the north-eastern constellation Bharani (bra-nye) (60) around the ox (2).
There are in addition twenty-seven lesser constellations (skar-chung), which White Berylenumerates (f. 159a). Of these, the six lesser con-
stellations of the east comprise Zur-phud-can, Lha-mo, gYang-skyod, Ze'u snying-gir, 'Od-chung rgyal-mo and Grul-mo. She-mo 'dab-
skar is the lesser constellation in the south-east. The seven lesser constellations of the south are Sri-rti rkang-gnyis, The'u rkang,
mChog-za' lha-'bum, Lu-gu sna, Bag-ma snag-dum and Se-me khyer. Sa-ge is the lesser constellation in the south-west. The seven lesser
constellations in the west are Bum-ldan, Che-nam, 'Khrus-bu skye, Khyi'u rgyas-byed, rDe'u thod-dkar and rDe'u mgo-dmar, while Lha-
lcam is in the north-west. The seven lesser constellations in the north are rGyal-nabs, Lha-mo gYang-skar, Lu-gu gnyis-ldan, skar-
drug, Las-sna and Gro-lod drag-stobs-ldan, while Gung-skabs-can is in the north-east.
The naming of the months after the constellations
According to the Indian system of astrology, the twelve months of the year are named after the twelve constellations with which their
full moons coincide, namely: Mrgaśiras, Pusyā, Maghā, Uttaraphalgunī, Citrā, Viśākhā, Jyesthā, Pārvāsādhā, Abhijit, Bhadrapada,
Aśvinī and Kșttikā. 198 Any constellation coinciding with the full moon is said to suggest‘growth' (dar-ba), while those coinciding with the
no-moon suggest ‘decline' (gud).
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises this topic as follows (Moonbeams, f. 14b):
Ninth, there are the twenty-eight constellations:
There are also twenty-seven lesser constellations,
Křttikā, Rohiņi, Mrgaśiras, Ārdrā, Punarvasū and Puşyā are the eastern stars,
Since there is no lesser one between Mrgaśiras and Ārdrā.
And Aśleşā is the south-east.
Maghä, Pūrvaphalguņi, Uttaraphalguņi, Hasrā, Citrā and Svāti are the southern stars,
And Viśākhā is in the south-west.
Anurādhā, Jyesthā, Mūlā, Pārvāsādhā, Uttarāsādha and Abhijit are the western stars,
Starting from the first spring month,
The following twelve [among the constellations]
Correspond to the twelve months [of the year]
And are the constellations associated with the full moon:
Mrgaśiras, Pusyā, Maghā, Uttaraphalgunī, Citrā, Viśākhā,
And Śravaņā is in the north-west.
Dhanasta, Śatavisā, Pūrvabhadrapada, Uttarabhadrapada, Revati and Asvinī are the northern stars,
And Bharani is in the north-east.
Jyeșthā, Pārvāsādhā, Abhijit, Bhadrapada, Asvinī and Krttikā.
The stars coinciding with any of the full moons
The six eastern constellations correspond to wood, and the southern ones to fire.
[of these months] suggest 'growth' (dar-ba),
And those coinciding with the no-moon suggest 'decline' (gud).
The western constellations to iron, the northern ones to water,
And the intermediate constellations to earth.



PaO2
25
353
4
OS
AR
C
G
COCCO
CSSSS
Plate 2, fig. 5
YA
31 (Witolo
SW
27
1
)
CO
17
2
y
NW
NE
54
59
Gues
uc



112
The White Beryl
Additional calculations applied in elemental divination
In addition to the nine basic techniques of elemental divination just described, three subsidiary calculations also have an important func-
tion when the divinations of natal horoscope, marriage, obstacle years, ill-health and death are practically applied. These comprise the
juxtaposition of the twelve sectors of growth and decline' (dar-gud bcu-gnyis), the calculation of the multiples of number nine (dgu-mig),
and the ‘tomb-sign’ prognosis (dur-mig). 199 So Lo-chen states (Moonbeams, f. 14b):
Thereafter, the three calculations of 'growth and decline',
Multiples of number nine', and the 'tomb-sign' [should be explained]:
Calculating the twelve sectors of growth and decline
The elements may be juxtaposed sequentially with the twelve successive sectors of growth and decline (dar-gud bcu-gnyis), a structure
which is perhaps modelled on the Buddhist twelve links of dependent origination.200 These twelve sectors respectively comprise: concep-
tion (dbugs-len),201 embryo (mngal-'jug), foetus (lus-rdzogs), birth (skyes), ablution (khrus), clothing (gos), work (las), growth (dar), decline
(gud), ill-health (nad), death (shi-ba) and tomb (dur). Among them, the sectors of growth, work, ablution, clothing, foetus and birth are
deemed to be auspicious, while those of conception, embryo, decline, ill-health, death and tomb are inauspicious. Positive prognoses are
indicated if the element in question coincides with one of the six auspicious sectors and negative outcomes are portended if the reverse is
the case.
Calculation of months, years, days, hours and trigrams
according to the sectors of growth and decline
In the case of the wood element these twelve sectors are juxtaposed with the months of the year, in a clockwise sequence, starting from
the first autumn or monkey month. In the case of the fire element, the calculation begins from the first winter or pig month. In the case of
the iron element, it begins from the first spring or tiger month; and in the case of the earth and water elements, from the first summer or
snake month. Tables 2.13 and 2.14 illustrate these correspondences.
2.13 Correspondence of the twelve sectors of growth and decline to the twelve months of the year
Element
wood
mouse/ablution
ox/clothing
tiger/work
hare/growth
snake/ill-health
horse/death
Months of the year and the corresponding sectors of growth and decline
monkey/conception bird/embryo
dog/foetus
pig/birth
pig/conception mouse/embryo ox/foetus
tiger/birth
tiger/conception hare/embryo dragon/foetus snake/birth
snake/conception horse/embryo sheep/foetus monkey/birth
fire
sheep/tomb
dog/tomb
hare/ablution
snake/work
horse/growth
dragon/decline
sheep/decline
dog/decline
dragon/clothing
sheep/clothing
dog/clothing
iron
bird/death
mouse/death
horse/ablution
monkey/ill-health
pig/ill-health
tiger/ill-health
monkey/work
pig/work
ox/tomb
bird/growth
mouse/growth
earth/water
bird/ablution
ox/decline
hare/death
dragon/tomb
This juxtaposition is similarly applied to the sequence of years, calendar days or hours, and also to the trigrams. In this last method, the
calculation of the twelve sectors begins from Zin in the case of persons born in a tiger or hare year, from Li in the case of persons born in a
horse or snake year, from Dva in the case of persons born in a bird or monkey year, and from Kham in the case of persons born in one of
the six earth and water years.202
2.14 Correspondence of the twelve sectors of growth and decline to the trigrams
Year
Trigrams and their corresponding sectors of growth and decline
tiger/hare
Zin/conception Zon/embryo Li/foetus Khon/birth
Zon/ill-health
Kham/work
Zin/work
Zin/decline
Li/decline
Khon/tomb
Khen/tomb
horse/snake
Li/conception
Dva/foetus
Khen/clothing
Gin/clothing
Zon/clothing
Khen/birth
Khon/ill-health
Dva/ablution
Kham/ablution
Zin/ablution
Li/ablution
Khon/embryo
Khen/embryo
Gin/embryo
Gin/growth
Zon/growth
Khon/growth
Khen/growth
Li/death
Dva/death
Kham/death
Zin/death
bird/monkey
Kham/foetus
Gin/birth
Dva/conception
Kham/conception
Li/ work
Dva/decline
Kham/decline
Khen/ill-health
Gin/ill-health
Gin/tomb
Zon/tomb
ox/sheep/dog/dragon/mouse/pig
Zin/foetus
Zon/birth
Khon/clothing
Dva/work
Classification of the sectors of growth and decline
As illustrated on Plate 5, fig. 20 and Plate 6, fig. 14, the best class of auspicious prognosis coincides with the sectors of growth and work,
the mediocre class of auspicious prognosis coincides with the sectors of ablution and clothing, and the worst class of auspicious prognosis
coincides with the sectors of foetus and birth.203
Similarly, the best class of inauspicious prognosis coincides with the sectors of conception and embryo, the
mediocre class of inauspicious prognosis coincides with the sectors of decline and ill-health, and the worst class of inauspicious prognosis
coincides with the sectors of death and tomb.
Names of the predictions associated with
the sectors of growth and decline
Each of the twelve sectors of growth and decline has its distinctive prognosis (kha-dmar), as illustrated on Plate 6, fig. 5.204 The prog-
noses associated with the sector of conception (dbugs-len) are likened to the ‘cessation of good fortune' (skal-zad), those associated with
the sector of embryo (mngal-gnas) are likened to “comfort (bde-ldan), those associated with the sector of foetus (lus-rdzogs) are likened to
‘falling into misfortune' (byur-ngan-lhung), those associated with the sector of birth (skyes) are likened to ‘obtaining great resources'
(longs-spyod che-thob), those associated with the sector of ablution (khrus) are likened to 'wish-fulfilment (bsam-grub), those associated
with the sector of clothing (gos) are likened to 'sustenance' (gso-thub), those associated with the sector of work (las) are likened to ‘long-
lasting continuity' (rgyun ring-ba), those associated with the sector of growth (dar) are likened to ‘finding the great treasure' (gter-chen
rnyed), those associated with the sector of decline (gud) are likened to ‘separation’ (bye-bral), those associated with the sector of ill-health
(nad) are likened to “calamity' ('phung-gyod), those associated with the sector of death (shi-ba) are likened to loss of luck' (gYang-nyams)
and those associated with the sector of tomb (dur) are likened to‘interruptions' (rgyun-chad). The readings also vary according to whether
the element being compared is that of the subject's vitality, body, destiny or luck.205



Right Detail of Plate 6, fig. 5 (see p. 115), showing the prognoses
pertaining to the sectors of death' and 'tomb'



114
The White Beryl
དར་རྒུད་རྣམས་
ཀྱི་གཟུགས་
དང་སྐུ་བྱ།
AUDIO
COM
mónahan
qalma
LTD) )
O
Topolony
ponas
cecay
UUD
25
Plate 6, fig. 5 The prognoses associated with the twelve sectors of growth and decline (see Part IV, p. 182, for explanatory table)
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises this topic as follows (Moonbeams, ff. 145–15b):
The first [of these] concerns the growth and decline of the elements,
Which are to be calculated in a computational sequence, beginning from the four
Corresponding to these [elements and months),
The following calculations (of the sectors of growth and decline)
are successively made in a clockwise sequence:
The three comprising conception, embryo and foetus,
first seasonal months.206
[The resulting prognostications) pertaining to these twelve sectors
[of physical growth and decline) are respectively designated as
'finding the great treasure', 'long-lasting' [continuity],
'wish-fulfilment', 'sustenance', 'comfort', 'obtaining great resources',
'cessation of good fortune', 'falling into misfortune', 'separation',
'calamity', 'loss of luck', 'interruption' and 'long-lasting continuity'.
Thus (calculations concerning) the sectors associated with the element wood207 begin
from the first autumn month, that of the monkey.
The three comprising birth, ablution and clothing,
Those associated with fire begin from the first winter month, that of the pig.
Those associated with iron begin from the first spring month, that of the tiger.
Those associated with earth or water begin from the first summer month, that of the snake.
The three comprising work, growth and decline,
The three comprising ill-health, death and tomb.
[The calculations) of these should be circumstantially applied,
On the basis of the years, months, days or hours.208
For each of these six auspicious and six inauspicious prognostications,
[The variable calculations of vitality, body, destiny, and luck
should be applied.
When the [twelve] sectors of growth and decline,
The best class of auspicious prognosis coincides with growth and work,
The mediocre class of auspicious prognosis coincides with ablution and clothing,
The worst class of auspicious prognosis coincides with foetus and birth,
The best class of inauspicious prognosis coincides with conception and embryo,
Are in association with the trigrams,
[They are calculated) in rotation, starting from 'conception':
The mediocre class of inauspicious prognosis coincides with decline and ill-health,
The calculation begins from Zin in the case of one born in a tiger or hare year,
And the worst class of inauspicious prognosis coincides with death and tomb.
It begins from Li in the case of one born in a horse or snake year,
It begins from Dva in the case of one born in a bird or monkey year,
And it begins from Kham in the case of one born in one of the six earth
or water years.



115
The hidden points of the turtle divination chart
OX
YAN
2002
Aaa
Calculating the multiples of number nine
When a given element coincides with one of the multiples of nine (dgu-mig) diverse portents are suggested. The multiples of nine may be
calculated on the basis of a solitary sign (rkyang), combined signs (sbrags), trigrams (spar), numeric squares (sme-ba) or constitutional
types (rus-khams). These calculations, along with those of the tomb-signs, are particularly important for the divination of obstacle years
(see below).
When the calculation is based on a solitary sign, in the case of a male subject, it begins from the mouse, conjoined
with his destiny element, and in the case of a female subject, from the bird, conjoined with her destiny element. Counting backwards in
multiples of nine, according to the subject's age, the calculation fixes successively upon one of the four adversarial year signs (gshed-
bzhi),209 i.e. the ox, dragon, sheep or dog, in the ninth, eighteenth, twenty-seventh, thirty-sixth, forty-fifth, fifty-fourth, sixty-third,
seventy-second and eighty-first years.210 These calculations are shown in table 2.15.
2.15 Calculating multiples of nine on the basis of a single sign
1
9
Age
Male subject
Female subject
mouse
bird
dragon
ox
18
sheep
dragon
27
dog
sheep
36
o x
dog
45
dragon
o x
54
sheep
dragon
63
dog
sheep
72
o x
dog
81
dragon
x
o
In particular, at the beginning and end of a given year there is a period when this ‘multiple of nine' (dgu-mig) coincides with the ‘tomb-
sign' (dur-mig). This period will be inauspicious at the ages of eighteen and thirty-six respectively in the cases of men and women born in
a tiger or hare year, and vice-versa in the case of men and women born in a horse or snake year. It will be inauspicious at the ages of fifty-
four and seventy-two respectively for men and women born in a bird or monkey year, and vice-versa in the case of men and women born
in a mouse, pig, ox, sheep, dog or dragon year. 211
When the calculation is based on combined signs, the count is also made in reverse. In the case of persons born in
the mouse, ox, dragon, sheep, dog or pig year, one should count backwards nine places from the mouse and fix upon the dragon. In the
case of persons born in a tiger or hare year, one should count from the hare and fix upon the sheep. In the case of persons born in a horse
or snake year, one should count from the horse and fix upon the dog. Then, in the case of persons born in a bird or monkey year, one
should count from the bird and fix upon the ox (table 2.16).



116
The White Beryl
2.16 Calculating multiples of nine on the basis of combined signs
Age
1
18
36
subject of mouse, ox, dragon, sheep, dog or pig natal year
mouse
sheep
ОХ
subject of tiger or hare natal year
9
dragon
sheep
dog
Ox
hare
horse
bird
27
dog
Ox
dragon
sheep
dog
o x
dragon
45
dragon
sheep
dog
o x
dragon
sheep
dog
54
sheep
dog
o x
dragon
subject of horse or snake natal year
subject of bird or monkey natal year
63
dog
DX
dragon
sheep
72 81
ОХ dragon
dragon sheep
sheep dog
dog ox
Furthermore, the fifth year following the year from which the count begins is deemed an ‘accursed’ year,212 and if this also coincides with
one of the four tomb-signs213 in the subject's ninth, twenty-first, thirty-third, forty-fifth, fifty-seventh, sixty-ninth or eighty-first year, it
becomes the 'crucial multiple of nine'.
When the calculation is based on trigrams, as illustrated on Plate 9, fig. 3, the multiples of nine are counted from
Li in the case of males, and from Kham in the case of females.214 When it is based on numeric squares, the multiples of nine are counted
from the subject's natal numeric square (skyes-sme), a new cycle beginning after every ninth numeric square.
Finally, when the multiples of nine are calculated on the basis of constitutional types, the count should be made in
reverse, starting from the mouse in the case of those of the water ('u) and earth (kungs) constitutional types, from the hare sign in the case
of those of the wood (keg) constitutional type, from the horse in the case of those of the fire (ji) constitutional type, and from the bird in the
case of those of the iron (shang) constitutional type. It will be inauspicious if a multiple of nine coincides with a tomb-sign. This computa-
tion and its portents are also illustrated on Plate 9, fig. 13.215
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises this topic as follows (Moonbeams, ff. 15b-16b):
Secondly, there is the computational sequence of the multiples of nine:
In particular, at the beginning and end of a given year,
As for the calculation based on trigrams,
[The multiples of nine) are calculated from Li in the case of males
This comprises five distinct (modes of calculation]:
There is one moment when the multiple of nine
One based on a solitary (sign), one based on combined (signs],
And the tomb-sign converge:
And from Kham in the case of females.
And those based on trigrams, numeric squares, and constitutional types.
It will be inauspicious if the multiple of nine coincides with the tomb-sign
As for the calculation based on numeric squares,
In one's eighteenth year, in the case of a male born in a tiger or hare year,
[The multiples of nine] are calculated from the subject's natal
First, concerning the calculation based on a solitary (sign);
Or in one's thirty-sixth year in the case of such a woman;
numeric square (skyes-sme).
In the case of a male, it begins from the mouse sign
In one's thirty-sixth year in the case of a male born in a horse or snake year,
216
conjoined with whichever of the five (elements) is appropriate, 216
Or in one's eighteenth year in the case of such a woman;
[Lastly], when the multiples of nine are calculated on the basis of
And in the case of a female, from the bird sign conjoined with
In one's fifty-fourth year in the case of a male born in a bird or monkey year,
constitutional types,
whichever of the five ſelements) is appropriate.
Or in one's seventy-second year in the case of such a woman;
The computational sequence begins from the mouse
Counting backwards in nines, one fixes (in succession upon
In one's seventy-second year in the case of a male born in a mouse or pig year,
In the case of those of the water ('4) and earth (kungs) types,
one of the four adversarial year-signs,
From the hare in the case of those of the wood (keg) type,
Or in one of the four adversarial years (of ox, sheep, dog and dragon);
Or in one's fifty-fourth year in the case of such a woman.
Thus, the multiples of nine fall successively on the ninth, eighteenth,
From the horse in the case of those of the fire (ji) type,
twenty seventh, thirty-sixth, forty-fifth, fifty-fourth, sixty-third,
And from the bird in the case of those of the iron (shang) type.
seventy second and eighty-first [years)
The calculation based on combined (signs) is made in rotation,
It is inauspicious if, counting backwards,
[A multiple of nine) coincides with a tomb-sign.
Starting from the signs corresponding to the four mid-[seasonal months):
Thus, in the case of (a subject born in one of the six years of earth and water, 21
217
One counts backwards from the mouse, and fixes upon the dragon.
In actuality, the calculation based on the combined (signs] will suffice.
Similarly, in the case of (a subject born in a tiger or hare year,
One (counts) from the hare, (and fixes upon) the sheep.
In the case of (a subject born in a horse or snake year,
One (counts) from the horse, (and fixes upon) the dog.
In the case of (a subject born in) a bird or monkey year,
One (counts) from the bird, [and fixes upon) the ox.
[In addition), the fifth year following the year from which the count begins
Is an 'accursed' year;
And when it coincides with one of the four tomb-signs
In the (subject's) ninth, twenty-first, thirty-third, forty-fifth, fifty-seventh,
sixty-ninth or eighty-first years
It is known as a 'crucial multiple of nine'.



117
The hidden points of the turtle divination chart
Calculating the tomb-sign
The tomb-sign (dur-mig) is formed by a combination of year-signs and trigrams. In the case of the wood element, it coincides with the
sheep and Khon, in the case of the fire element with the dog and Khen, in the case of the iron element with the ox and Gin, and in the case
of the earth and water elements with the dragon and Zon.
Calculation of the years coinciding with
the four aspects of the tomb-sign
When the prognostication known as the ‘eighty sectors of the tomb-sign' (dur-gyi khang-bu brgyad-cu) is made, the count should begin
from the mouse for subjects with a natal mouse, ox, dragon, sheep, dog or pig sign; from the hare in the case of those with a natal tiger or
hare sign; from the horse in the case of those with a natal snake or horse year; and from the bird in the case of those with a natal bird or
monkey year. These four signs are known as the 'four opening keys' (byed-pa'i lde-mig bzhi.). More specifically, the count begins from
whichever of these year signs is combined with the subject's destiny element, so that there are twenty correct starting points for the
count (yang-dag bskor-'go nyi-shu). 218
The years coinciding with the four aspects of the tomb-sign can then be calculated for a given subject. Among
these aspects, the 'strong tomb-sign' (rang-dur che) is obtained by counting backwards until one reaches a tomb-sign compatible with the
corresponding destiny element. The 'weak tomb-sign' (rang-dur chung) is located seven places from that (bdun-zur), and also with a com-
patible destiny element. The 'strong adversarial tomb-sign' (gshed-dur che) refers to a tomb-sign in an enemy-relationship to the corre-
sponding destiny element, and the 'weak adversarial tomb-sign' (gshed-dur chung) is located seven places from that (bdun-zur). One
should know that, whatever the present year may be, the strong and weak tomb-signs and the strong and weak adversarial tomb-signs
coincide respectively with the ages twenty-one, fifty-one, forty-five and fifteen.
For example, if one counts backwards from the water bird year, at age twenty-one, coinciding with the water ox,
one encounters the strong tomb-sign; the sign seven places removed from it, sharing the identical destiny element, is the weak tomb-
sign, in this case the water sheep. The strong adversarial tomb-sign in this example will be the earth ox, since earth is the enemy of water,
and the weak adversarial tomb-sign will be the earth sheep.
Since each of these four aspects of the tomb-sign may be calculated by means of each of the aforementioned
twenty correct starting points for the count, there are altogether ‘eighty computational sequences'. If any one of these eighty calculations
coincides with an outer planetary aspect, it will be slightly inauspicious: among them are those known as the four black undertakers',
namely the water dragon, the wood sheep, the fire dog and the iron ox.
Calculation of calendar days associated with the tomb-signs
In addition, there is the calculation known as the ‘thirty-six days of the tomb-signs' (dur-gyi nyi-ma so-drug). This is so named because
each of the twelve months of the year has three days coinciding with tomb-signs. In the case of the six male months, these three days
coincide with the sheep days, and in the case of the six female months with the ox days. As such, they fall upon the sixth, eighteenth and
thirtieth days of the lunar month.219
In general, the sixth calendar day of the first seasonal months, the sixteenth of the mid-seasonal months, and the
twenty-sixth of the last seasonal months may also be known as the celestial, atmospheric and terrestrial tomb-signs.
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī provides the following summary of tomb-sign calculation (Moonbeams, ff. 166-17a):
In each of these, the calculation is made in reverse,
The calculation known as the 'thirty-six days of the tomb-signs'
And on reaching a tomb-sign compatible with the
Is also referred to as the 'sixfold and threefold tomb day prognosis',
Thirdly, there is [the calculation of the tomb-sign,
Which is formed by a combination of the outer year-signs and the inner trigrams:
The tomb-sign of the wood element coincides with the sheep and Khon,
The tomb-sign of the fire element coincides with the dog and Khen,
Since three such days occur in each month,
corresponding destiny element,
This is known as the 'strong tomb-sign'.
And it is certain that during the six male months
The tomb-sign of the iron element coincides with the ox and Gin,
The number seven places from that,
These coincide with the days of the sheep,
And that of the earth and water elements with the dragon and Zon.
Compatible with the destiny element,
While during the six female months,
Is the 'weak tomb-sign'.
They coincide with the days of the ox.
There is a distinctive calculation known as
When [the calculation] coincides with a tomb-sign
[Finally), in each the three seasonal months
The eighty sectors of the tomb-sign'.
Here, the computational sequences commencing from the mouse, horse,
In an enemy-relationship to the corresponding destiny element,
It is known as the 'strong adversarial tomb-sign',
And the number seven places from that
[There is a day of the tomb-sign,
bird and hare signs
Is the 'weak adversarial tomb-sign'.
Are known as the 'four opening keys'.
Now, corresponding to the subject's destiny element,
Coinciding respectively with the sixth, sixteenth and twenty-sixth days),
And these may be respectively designated
As the celestial, atmospheric and terrestrial tomb-signs. 221
Now, whichever the present year may be,
The computational sequence commences from one of the five mouse years
The strong and weak tomb-signs
And the strong and weak adversarial tomb-signs
In the case of those [whose element) is earth or water,
From one of the hare signs in the case of the two sorts whose element is wood,
From one of the horse signs, in the case of the two sorts whose element is fire,
Coincide respectively with the ages twenty-one, fifty-one, forty-five and fifteen.
Since each of these four aspects may be calculated through each of the twenty
computational sequences,
And from one of the five bird signs,
In the case of the two sorts whose element is iron. 220
There are altogether ‘eighty computational sequences'.
Accordingly, these are altogether known as the 'twenty correct computational
sequences'.
The nine principal and three subsidiary techniques outlined above are applied practically in the context of the different themes of divina-
tion, which constitute the remaining sections of this work. These include natal horoscope, marriage, obstacle years, the impact of the
hour of divination, ill-health, death and two series of computational charts. It is therefore essential that the student of elemental divina-
tion comprehends these basic techniques of computation before learning to apply them in specific contexts.



Geomantic aspects of the years, months, days and hours
SO



120
The White Beryl
Geomancy (sa-dpyad) is important for the construction of temples and other buildings that benefit the soil, as well as palaces, government
offices, fortresses, ordinary dwellings and burial sites. Although this specific topic is not illustrated in the paintings, and is not discussed
in Moonbeams, a brief summary from The White Beryl is included here since it is closely related to the calculation of the obstacles and
opportune passageways of the years, months, days and hours.
Initially, inauspicious signs should be inspected, such as the form of a prospective building site (sa-dbyibs), the
form of the space around it (gnam-dbyibs), its rivers, forests and so forth. Ritual means should be applied in order to reverse the hostile
attributes of the site and adverse exposure of the 'heavenly gate' (gnam-sgo).
Then the outer and inner hostile attributes of buildings (khang-pa phyi-nang-gi dgra) should be examined, along
with the impact of sunlight and moonlight, defective doors, etc. There are rites for rectifying the presence of water within the site, loss of
wealth, and the influence of malevolent forces. Particular surveys should be made for agricultural land (zhing-sa brtag-pa), mountain ter-
rain (ri-dpyad brtag-pa), isolated mountain hermitages (dben-gnas ri-khrod-sa) and so forth.
One should then follow the detailed modes of requesting the site from the spirit lords of the soil when construct-
ing a temple, a palace, a fortress, an ordinary dwelling or a burial site. There are special techniques for averting negativity and for pro-
tecting the site, for promoting good auspices, and for turning adverse occurrences – such as thunderbolts at the door or vultures at the
window – into auspicious ones.
The geomantic aspects associated with the twelve animal signs are depicted on the third cartouche of Plates 3–8.
These differ according to whether the calculations are made for the year, month, day or hour. Among them, the obstacles and opportune
passageways of the years and days from the mouse to the tiger are depicted on Plate 3, those of the years and days from the hare to the
horse on Plate 4, and those of the years and days from the sheep to the pig on Plate 5. The geomantic obstacles and opportune passage-
ways of the months and hours are subsequently depicted: those from the tiger month and hour to the sheep month and hour on Plate 6,
those from the monkey month and hour to the pig month and hour on Plate 7, and those of the mouse and ox months and hours on Plate
8. All the drawings in this cartouche correspond to the charts illustrated in White Beryl, ff. 75–84. There are, however, occasional
differences in the direction in which the central animal's head points, which, as some suggest, may indicate a different starting point for
the calculations.
Spirit lords of the soil (White Beryl, Ch. 31)
The ancient science of geomancy is based on a survey of the locations of the spirit lords of the soil (Skt. bhūmipati, Tib. sa-bdag), since the
opportune sectors of the years, months, days or hours are deemed to be those not occupied by the spirit lords of the soil. Activities coin-
ciding with the presence of the spirit lords of the soil in a specific location may only be undertaken if counteracting rituals are performed.
These spirits are illustrated and enumerated, along with their shifting locations, their respective influences, and counteracting rites, in
White Beryl, Ch. 31 (ff. 441–480), while the actual implementation of geomancy (sa-dpyad), for the construction of buildings and so forth,
is described in Ch. 32 (ff. 481–520).
In antiquity, when the bodhisattva Mañjughoșa emanated the reliquary turtle (ring-sel-gyi rus-sbal) and incised
it with his sword of contemplation (see above, p. 50), the spirit lords of the soil are said to have emerged from the turtle’s subtle
vapour (rdul-gyi rlangs-pa). Among them, the king, The-se, emerged at the turtle's crown; his minister (blon-po), at the heart;
his astrologer (bla-mkhyen), at the right lung; the queen mother, The-khyem, at the left lung; the queen, Hang-phan, at the right arm;
the royal bodyguard, Se-shar, at the left arm; the king's steed (rang-rta), at the right leg; the royal timekeeper, Se-bya, at the left leg;
the chancellor, Se-byi, at the tail; the royal dog, Hal-khyi, from the combined humours; the serpent-bellied spirit (ITo'-phye), from
the skin; the monthly spirit lords (zla-ba'i sa-bdag), from the forehead; the daily spirit lords (zhag-gi sa-bdag), from the right hip; and
the hourly spirit lords (dus-kyi sa-bdag), from the left hip. Also, lesser spirits emerged, such as The-grum, from the belly; 'Brug-lha,
from the small intestine; the Grol-bu Inga, from the heart; the gNyan-chen, from the limbs; and the minor spirit lords (sil-ma'i sa-
bdag) from the turtle's minor channels.
According to the Gathering of All Precious Elements ( 'Byung-ba rin-chen kun-'dus), which is the primary source enu-
merating the spirit lords of the soil, their most detailed enumeration comprises 1,000, the intermediate enumeration comprises 150,
while the smallest comprises eighty-one. However, when these are subdivided according to elements, spatial locations and their outer,
inner, secret and most secret aspects, the number is said to be infinite.
In general, there are said to be 102 spirit lords who are ever-present, without reference to temporal fluctua-
tions, and a further 474 directly associated with the years, months, days and hours. The former include the spirit lords of the ‘nine
subterranean levels' (sa-'og rim-dgu'i sa-bdag), the twenty-one permanent, unchanging' spirits (gtan-du mi-'pho nyer-gcig) and the 'sev-
enty-two abiders' (gnas-pa don-gnyis), who remain fixed in the directions associated with their respective animal signs (see White Beryl,
f. 442a). The latter (f. 441b) comprise 231 moving spirit lords of the years (lo'i sa-bdag), 124 moving spirit lords of the months (zla-ba'i sa-
bdag), eighty-one moving spirit lords of the days (zhag-gi sa-bdag) and thirty-seven moving spirit lords of the hours (dus-kyi sa-bdag).
Opposite Detail of Plate 4, figs 3 and 4 (see pp. 125 and 134),
showing geomantic aspects of the horse year and horse day



121
Geomantic aspects of the years, months, days and hours
༥ ཉིན་
ཟླ་ཁྱིམ། མེ་བྱི།
བློནོ་ཡིའུ་དམགོ་དཔོན།
ཀུངས་སྐྱེལ་
ཐེ་སེ་ཧངནེ།གངན།
བོན་པོ་ཙང་ཀུན།
ཏསོ་སུས་པ།
ཚང་གི༌ངར་པོ།
3* ༡༣
ཀྱིས་
ཕྱིས་
འོ མ
རང་། རྟ་ཁྲིད།
ས་རྒྱལ་བཅག།
སོ་ལས་བུམ།
སེ་བ་བུ་མཁྱེན།
དཔཁྱི་བ་ཕྱེ། མག་པ། །
བྱར་བ།མི
སེར། ཙང་ཀུན་
འཕྱེའོ།།
སྟག་གཟིག་ནག་མོ།
གཤིན་རྗེ་
བྱིས་པ་རྟ་བདུད།
:
ནད་བདུང་གཤེད་སོ།
ཀལ་འོ་ཕྲན།
སྦེ་བ།བླ་མཁྱེན།



122
The White Beryl
Spirit lords of the years (White Beryl, ff. 443a-455b)
This category of spirit lords includes the most important group of King The-se's royal family (rje-blon nyer-drug ma-bu 'khor). Their
detailed anthropomorphic descriptions are given in White Beryl, along with illustrations, and a summary of the implications that infringe-
ment of their geomantic space has for construction projects, marriage, health, death and so forth. The rites through which such infringe-
ments can be repaired are also indicated.
Among them, King The-se, who ‘rides the horse of the present year', has an anti-clockwise motion and arises in
conjunction with the summer solstice. The queen mother, The-khyem, has an anti-clockwise motion and arises five days after the sum-
mer solstice. The queen, Hang-phan (or Hang-ne), moves and arises in conjunction with the king. The crown prince, Te-so, has a clock-
wise motion and arises four days after the summer solstice. The royal minister, Tsang-kun, has an anti-clockwise motion and arises
twelve days after the summer solstice. The royal astrologer, Se-ba bla-mkhyen, arises twelve days before the summer solstice, and has an
anti-clockwise motion - his outer position at the seventh removed aspect (bdun-zur) of the present year, his inner position coinciding with
mid-seasonal months containing three compatible animal signs, and his secret position coinciding with the start of the four first seasonal
months, the end of the four mid-seasonal months, and following the outer adversarial aspect (phyi'i gshed) of the four last seasonal months.
The royal dog-walker, Hang-phan ser-po bya-ra-ba (or Hal-khyi'i kha-khrid), has a clockwise motion and arises twenty-four days after
the summer solstice, coinciding with the dog sign in the case of tiger, horse and dog years; the sheep sign in the case of pig, sheep and hare
years; the dragon sign in the case of mouse, dragon and monkey years; and the ox sign in the case of bird, mouse and snake years. The
chancellor of the exchequer, Se-byi, has a clockwise motion and arises eight days after the summer solstice, coinciding with the seventh
removed aspect (bdun-zur) of Hang-phan. The bodyguard assassin, Se-shar, moves clockwise and arises eight days before the summer
solstice, coinciding with the tomb sign aspect (dur) of the present year. The royal steed, Se-ba rang-rta, has an anti-clockwise motion and
arises four days before the summer solstice. The royal groom, Se'u rta-khrid, has an anti-clockwise motion and arises four days before the
summer solstice. The winged timekeeper, Se-bya, has an anti-clockwise motion and arises one day before the summer solstice. The royal
upholsterer, Sa-bdag se-ba gdan-'ding, has an anti-clockwise motion and arises two days before the summer solstice, his position coincid-
ing with that of the king. The royal policeman, Se-lo sa-'chag kungs-myul, has an anti-clockwise motion and arises sixteen days before
the summer solstice, his positions coinciding with the two adversarial years (gshed-lo) preceding and following that of the king. The royal
sweeper, Se-lo sa-'phyag, has an anti-clockwise motion and arises sixteen days before the summer solstice, coinciding with the fourth
removed adversarial year-sign (bzhi-gshed) following that of the king. The royal dog, Hal-khyi nag-po, has a clockwise motion and arises
at the end of the year, his position coinciding with the luck aspect of the previous year. The princess, dKar-sham, has an anti-clockwise
motion and arises three days after the summer solstice, coinciding with Hal-khyi's position. Her husband, Prince sBal-te, has the same
position and the same feminine functions. General Vang-ging dmar-po has various positions depending upon the year, and arises in con-
junction with the luck aspect of the day. General Tsang-kun has an anti-clockwise motion and arises at the end of the sixteenth day fol-
lowing the summer solstice. His adjutant, Tsang-kun 'phye'o, has an anti-clockwise motion and arises after the sixteenth day. The dog-
headed assistant Tsang-kun khyi-mgo has an anti-clockwise motion and arises on the day of the summer solstice, coinciding with the
fourth removed adversarial sign (bzhi-gshed) before the present year. The advisor, Bla-mkhyen phe'u, has a clockwise motion and arises
on the day of the summer solstice, coinciding with a third position before a year sign associated with the four mid-seasonal months, or the
four first seasonal months, or with the seventh removed bdun-zur aspect of the four last seasonal months. The scorpion-headed Zin-
'phung has an anti-clockwise motion and arises on the day of the summer solstice coinciding with the sixth day before the present year.
The venomous Pi-ling, whose position varies according to the year sign, has an anti-clockwise motion and arises at the summer solstice.
Lastly, the eleven ministers of King Se (se-rgyal rje-blon bcu-gcig), who are enumerated on ff. 449b-451a, have an anti-clockwise motion
and also arise at the summer solstice.
4



123
Geomantic aspects of the years, months, days and hours
G
12
tring
S
25
22
The spirit lords of the years, illustrations taken from White Beryl,
Derge edition, Chapter 31. 1 King The-se. 2 Queen mother, The-
khyem. 3 Queen Hang-phan. 4 Crown Prince Te-so. 5 Royal minister,
Tsang-kun. 6 Royal astrologer, Se-ba bla-mkhyen. 7 Royal dog-
walker, Hang-phan ser-po bya-ra-ba. 8 Chancellor of the exchequer,
Se-byi. 9 Bodyguard assassin, Se-shar. 10 Royal steed, Se-ba rang-
rta. 11 Royal groom, Se'u rta-khrid. 12 Winged timekeeper, Se-bya.
13 Royal upholsterer, Sa-bdag se-ba gdan-'ding. 14 Royal policeman,
Se-lo sa-'chag kungs-myul. 15 Royal sweeper, Se-lo sa-'phyag.
16 Princess dkar-sham. 17 Royal dog, Hal-khyi nag-po. 18 Prince
sBal-te. 19 General Vang-ging dmar-po. 20 General Tsang-kun.
21 Adjutant, Tsang-kun 'phye'o. 22 Dog-headed assistant, Tsang-
kun khyi-mgo. 23 Advisor, Bla-mkhyen phe'u. 24 Scorpion-headed
Zin-'phung. 25 Venomous Pi-ling. 26 Chief of the eleven ministers
of King Se.
Distinctions are made between years which are very black (lo-nag che-ba) in terms of these aspects, and slightly black (lo-nag chung-ba).
The ritual means of counteracting these aspects are also indicated.
Other groups of yearly spirit lords, who also have an impact upon the months, days and hours, include the ‘retinue
of nine black spirit lords' (nag-mo dgu-skor/gshed-lha 'khor-dgu), the ‘nine deities of the basic numeric squares' (sme-ba rtsa-ba'i lha dgu),
the forty-five ‘palace deities' (pho-brang lha zhe-lnga), the five ‘lesser 'gog-ku deities' (sil-ma'i 'gog-ku lha lnga), the ‘twelve hidden deities?
(gab-pa'i lha bcu-gnyis), and the ‘male and female celestial dog spirits' (gnam-khyi pho-mo). All these yearly spirit lords are enumerated in
detail in White Beryl, Ch. 31.
Among them, the ‘retinue of nine black spirit lords' comprises: rGyal-po mtshon-thogs, who rides the present
year and moves anti-clockwise, arising at the summer solstice; Ka-la ro-zan, who moves clockwise and arises 124 or 80 days after the
summer solstice, coinciding with the luck aspect of the previous year; sMe-ba bla-mkhyen, who moves clockwise and arises twenty-four
days before the summer solstice, coinciding with the final seasonal months in which there are three compatible signs; Bus-pa rta-bdud,
who moves anti-clockwise and arises four days before the summer solstice; gShed-po dur-'debs, who moves clockwise and arises eight
days before the summer solstice, coinciding with the tomb sign of the luck element; Nad-bdud mgo-gcod byi-ba, who moves anti-clock-
wise and arises at the end of the sixteenth day, coinciding with diverse positions; sTag-gzig sna-dus, who moves clockwise and arises
eight days after the summer solstice, coinciding with the seventh removed aspect (bdun-zur) of the last seasonal months with three com-
patible signs; gShin-rje zas-'brog, who moves clockwise and arises four days after the summer solstice, coinciding with the luck aspect;
and Nag-mo khyo-med, who moves anti-clockwise and arises two days after the summer solstice.



124
The White Beryl
སོ་ཤར་
ཧར་ཉི་ ཤུ་སེ་བ་བླ་མཁྱེན་སྒྲ་འབྱེའོ
Plate 3, fig. 3 (Ms I: ff. 13-15): Geomantic obstacles and opportune passageways associated with the years (lo'i sa-bdag 'gag-'gro lam) 4
ག་པ།
Mouse year (byi-lo)
Yellow SE: dog-walker Bya-ra-ba
Red S(ii): astrologer Se-ba bla-mkhyen
Yellow SW: bodyguard Ser-shar,
Red S(i): royal dog Hal-khyi, princess
dKar-shan, son-in-law sBal-te, Zin-phung*
སའུརད་ན།རྟ་ཁྲིད།
adjutant Tsang-kun 'phye'o
White Wi): royal steed Se-'u rang rta,
Green E(ii): sweeper Se-lo sa-'phyag
Mouse year (byi-lo)
groom Se'u rta-khrid, Pi-ling
Green E(i): prince Te-se,
White W(ii): prime minister Tsang-kun,
general Vang-ging dmar-p0
assistant Khyi-mgo
༧ཀགོ་
Yellow NE (opportune passageway)
Blue N(ii): king The-se, queen Hang-ne,
Blue N(i): time-keeper Se-bya,
Yellow NW: queen mother The-khyem,
upholsterer Se-ba gdan-'dings, eleven ministers
secret position of astrologer
chancellor Se-byi, policeman Kungs-myul,
བྱིན་ སི་བྱ་
of king The-se, inner position of astrologer Se-ba
Se-ba bla-mkhyen
general (Tsang-kun),
advisor Bla-mkhyen phe'u
bla-mkhyen, hidden spirit lord gNyan-khra
Plate 3, fig. 3 Mouse year.
* Grey/brown text denotes red text in the original manuscript, see note 4.
Ox year (glang-lo)
Yellow SE: bodyguard Se-shar,
སེཤཔས་མོ་
Red S() (opportune passageway)
Red Si): Zin-phung
Yellow SW: astrologer Se-ba bla-mkhyen,
སེ་བ་ཐེན སེ་པ།
sweeper Se-lo sa-'phyag,
chancellor Se-byi, advisor Bla-mkhyen
བླམཁྱེན་ཡིན། ང་
གདུངས་ཚུལ།
policeman Kungs-myul
འདུ་ས1:3
Green E(ii): eleven ministers of king The-se
Green E(i): royal dog Hal-khyi,
princess dKar-sham, son-in-law sBal-te
phe'u, general Vang-ging
White W(i) (opportune passageway)
White W(ii): royal steed Se'u rang-rta,
groom Se'u rta-khrid, prime minister Tsang-kun,
Ox year (glang-lo)
ཚ་
inner position of astrologer Se-ba bla-mkhyen
SE
Yellow NE: King The-se, queen Hang-ne,
Blue N(ii): time-keeper Se-bya, Pi-ling
Blue N(i): queen mother The-khyem,
Yellow NW: assistant Khyi-mgo,
upholsterer Se-ba gdan-'dings,
prince Te-se
secret position of astrologer Se-ba bla-mkhyen,
-
འགཟླ་མཁྱེན་ནང་
ཁྱིམ་ཐིན་གསང༌།
ཙང་ཀུན་འཕྱེའོ།།
སེ་རྒྱལ་ཉནོ།
གདན་འདྲིས་བྱ་ར་བ།
རབ་ག་ངཔོ།གན་ལྕང་
dog-walker Bya-ra-ba, general
adjutant Tsang-kun 'phye'o
(Tsang-Kun), hidden Spirit gNyan-ljang
Plate 3. fig. 3 Ox year.
Tiger year (stag-lo)
Yellow SE: chancellor Se-byi nor-srungs,
Red S(i): sweeper Se-lo sa-'phyag
Yellow SW: Zin-phung,
སེ་བྱི་ནོར་སྲུངས།
བློ་མཁྱེན་ཡེའུ།
།
།
སེ་ལོ་ས་འཕྱུག་
Red S(ii): inner position of astrologer
Se-ba bla-mkhyen
advisor Bla-mkhyen phe'u
ཐིམ་ཕུཔས་རྒྱལ་
བཅུ་གཅིག།
སེ་བ་བླ་མཁྱེན། ཏེ་སོ་
eleven ministers of king The-se
White W(i): astrologer Se-ba bla-mkhyen,
Green E(ii): general Vang-ging dmar-po, Pi-ling,
secret position of astrologer Se-ba bla-mkhyen
prince Te-se
མིང༌། བྱིན་ལགས༌།
Green E(i): king The-se, queen Hang-ne,
Tiger year (stag-lo)
White W(ii) (opportune passageway)
upholsterer Se-ba gdan-'dings,
1
་
།
hidden spirit Bya-khyung ka-ru
，
Yellow NE: bodyguard Se-shar,
Blue N(ii): queen mother The-khyem,
Blue N(i): royal dog Hal-khyi,
Yellow NW: royal steed Se'u rang-rta,
time-keeper Se-bya, general Tsang-kun,
prime minister Tsang-kun
princess dKar-sham, son-in-law sBal-te,
groom Se'u rta-khrid, dog-walker Bya-ra-ba,
ཐེ་སེ་ཧང་ན།གདན་འདིངས་
བྱ་ཁྱུང་གདུ།
སེཤར། ཀུངས་ཚུལ། ཁྱིམ་བོན་པོ་ཚང་། ཧལ་ཁྱི་ བུ་མོ།མག་] རང་རྟ།རྟཁྲིད་བྱ་རབ།
| NSA LAI HÀ | THỊ THUỘC | Sandal
<སྐག་༨ཡིན། -
policeman Kungs-myul
assistant Khyi-mgo
adjutant Tsang-kun 'phye'o
Plate 3, fig. 3 Tiger year.
Plate 4, fig. 3 (Msi: ff. 16-19): Geomantic obstacles and opportune passageways associated with the years (lo'i sa-bdag 'gag-'gro lam), continued
Hare year (yos-lo)
པ
Yellow SE: policeman Kungs-myul
Red S(i): prince Te-so
Red S(ii): sweeper Se-lo sa-'phyag
Yellow SW: dog-walker Bya-ra-ba, Pi-ling
་
ཀུངས་ཚུལ།
ཏསོ་སྲས་པོ།
མི་ལོ་ས་འོག།།
བྱང་བ།
གི་མིང་
White Wi): royal dog Hal-khyi,
Green E(ii): king The-se, queen Hang-ne,
upholsterer Se-ba gdan-'dings,
princess dKar-sham, son-in-law sBal-te, Zin-phung
Hare year (yos-lo)
ཀྱི་སཏང་སྟེ་གདན་འདིས། ང
བླམ@ན་ཞིང་།རུས་སྦལ།
དམྱི་བུ་མག་པ། ཐུང་།
inner position of astrologer Se-ba bla-mkhyen,
hidden spirit Rus-sbal
Green E(i): time-keeper Se-bya,
White W(ii): astrologer Se-ba bla-mkhyen,
secret position of astrologer Se-ba bla-mkhyen
སོ་བ་སྦྲེམཁྱེན།
ཨི་བྱ་དུས་འཛིན་| 1:|:
མཁྱེན་གསང༌
eleven ministers of king The-se
Yellow NW: bodyguard Se-shar,
Yellow NE: queen mother The-khyem,
Blue N(ii): prime minister Tsang-kun,
Blue N(i): royal steed Se'u rang-rta,
ས་རྒྱལ་བུ་གཅིག།
chancellor Se-byi, general Tsang-kun,
assistant Khyi-mgo, general Vang-ging
groom Se'u rta-khrid
adjutant Tsang-kun 'phye'o
འང་རྟ། རྟ་ཕྲེང།
advisor Bla-mkhyen phe'u
དམག་ད་ན་གླེན་ཡིའུ།
ཨི
gཔ་གི།
ཙང་ཀུན་འཕྱེའོ།
Plate 4, fig. 3 Hare year.



125
Geomantic aspects of the years, months, days and hours
ཀྱི་སེ།ཧང་ནི་གདུན་འཛིgl ཧལ་ཁྱི་བུ&མག་བ། །
བླ་རིབ་མག་འབག
སའར་སེ་ལོ།
Dragon year ('brug-lo)
Yellow SE: king The-se, queen Hang-ne,
Red S(i): royal dog Hal-khyi, princess dKar-sham,
Red S(ii) (opportune passageway)
Yellow SW: bodyguard Se-shar,
sweeper Se-lo sa-'phyag
upholsterer Se-ba gdan-'dings,
son-in-law sBal-te
dog-walker Bya-ra-ba,
ཉིད་ཀྱི་དུས་འཛིན མ
general Tsang-kun, hidden spirit Ba-dan ser
Green E(ii): time-keeper Se-bya
Dragon year ('brug-lo)
White W(i) (opportune passageway)
White W(1)I: Zin-phung, Pi-ling
Green E(i): queen mother The-khyem, prince Te-so
a:ཁྱིམ།ཏ་སོ། སྲས་པོ་
ཤིན་ཕུང༌། པི་ལc།
Yellow NE: assistant khyi-mgo, policeman
Blue N(ii): prime minister Tsang-kun,
Blue N(0): eleven ministers of king The-Se
Yellow NW: astrologer Se-ba bla-mkhyen,
Kungs-myul, adjutant Tsang-kun 'phye'o, secret
chancellor Se-byi, advisor Bla-mkhyen phe'u,
ཁྱིམག་ཀུངས་མྱལ། བློན་ཚན་དང་ཏི་ཚོའི
position of astrologer Se-ba bla-mkhyen
royal steed Se'u rang-rta, groom
Se'u rta-khrid, inner position of
position of astrologer Se-ba bla-mkhyen
སི་བ་བློན།སེ་
བློན་ལོ41 གིང
general Vang-ging
གསs|་
Plate 4, fig. 3 Dragon year.
Snake year (sbrul-10)
Yellow SE: bodyguard Se-shar, time-keeper
Se-bya, general Tsang-kun
Red S(ii): secret position of astrologer
Yellow SW: chancellor Se-byi,
སོཔ། ས་བྱ་
དག་དཔོན།
བྲེ་སེ་ཧཡེ་གདན་འདིང
བ
ཀ སགསབ་ཐེའུ།
Red S(i): king The-se, queen Hang-ne,
upholsterer Se-ba gdan-'dings,
hidden spirit Tsang-kun
Se-ba bla-mkhyen
policeman Kungs-myul, advisor Bla-mkhyen phe'o
Green E(ii): queen mother The-khyem,
ས་ལས་སླ
ཟེ་ཁྱིམ། བློན་པོ། ཙང་ཀུན།
White W(i): sweeper Se-lo sa-'phyag
prime minister Tsang-kun
Snake year (sbrul-lo)
White W(ii): general Vang-ging,
Green E(i): royal dog Hal-khyi, princess dKar-
sham, son-in-law sBal-te, assistant Khyi-mgo
Yellow NE: royal steed Se'u rang-rta,
inner position of astrologer Se-ba bla-mkhyen
6ལgབུམ་མགལ།
ཝང་གིང༌། བན་ནང་
།
Blue N(ii) (opportune passageway)
Blue N(I): astrologer Se-ba bla-mkhyen,
Yellow NW: Zin-phung,
groom Se'u rta-khrid, dog-walker Bya-ra-ba,
prince Te-so, Pi-ling
eleven ministers of king The-se
adjutant Tsang-kun 'phye'o
ར་རྟ།རྟ་ཁྲིད།བྱེ་ན།
ཙང་ཀུན་འཕྱོའ/
སེ་ཁ་ཐེན་ཏེ་ས་སྲས་པོ། ཟིན་ཕུང་།ས་རྒྱལ་
ཕུལ་བ། ཐན་གཅིག།
Plate 4, fig.3Snake year.
Horse year (rta-lo)
Yellow SE: queen mother The-khyem,
Red S(i): time-keeper Se-bya,
Red S(ii): king The-se, queen Hang-ne,
Yellow SW (opportune passageway)
རྗེ་སེ་ཧང་ནི།གངན་
chancellor Se-byi, advisor Bla-mkhyen phe'o,
secret position of astrologer Se-ba bla-mkhyen
upholsterer Se-ba gdan-'dings,
བློནཡིའུ་དམག་དཔོན། ས་བྱ་དུས་འཛིན།
ཀུངས་ཚུལ།
བོན་པོ་ཙང་ཀུན།
general Tsang-kun, policeman Kungs-myul
inner position of astrologer Se-ba bla-mkhyen,
hidden spirit Byi-lam
སེ་སྲས་པོ།
ང་གིཔརབ་པོ།
Green E(ii): prime minister Tsang-kun,
White W(i): prince Te-so,
assistant Khyi-mgo
general Vang-ging dmar-p0
White W(ii): sweeper Se-lo sa-'phyag
Green E(): royal steed Se'u rang-rta,
Horse year (rta-lo)
རང་། རྟ་ཁྲིད།
སོ་མ་ས་ལar
groom Se'u rta-khrid,
eleven ministers of king The-se
Yellow NE: bodyguard Se-shar,
སེམ། ཙཔཀུན་
ཉཔgབ། མགཔ།
Blue N(ii): astrologer Se-ba bla-mkhyen
Yellow NW: dog-walker Bya-ra-ba, Pi-ling
བྱ་རབ།སི་ལིང་
Blue N(): royal dog Hal-khyi, princess dkar-sham,
son-in-law sBal-te, Zin-phung
adjutant Tsang-kun 'phye'o
Plate 4, fig. 3 Horse year.
Plate 5, fig. 3 (Ms I: ff. 20-24): Geomantic obstacles and opportune passageways associated with the years (lo'i sa-bdag 'gag-'gro lam), continued
Sheep year (lug-lo)
Yellow SE: assistant Khyi-mgo, secret position
Red S(i): queen mother The-khyem, prince Te-so
R ed Scii): time-keeper Se-bya, general Vang-ging
ཕྱི་མགོ་ན་གསང། ཐེ་ཁྱིམ་བཙུན་མོ་
ཙང་ཀུན་འཕྱེའོ། ཏེ་སེ་སྲས་པོ།།
ཆེ ་བྱ་དུམ་ཝ ། ཤཱ་སེ་ཧཛཉེ་གདན་
Yellow SW: king The-se, queen Hang-ne,
upholsterer Se-ba gdan-'dings,
of astrologer Se-ba bla-mkhyen,
adjutant Tsang-kun 'phye'o
dog-walker Bya-ra-ba, general Tsang-kun,
hidden spirit Be-sna
ཧལ་ཁྱི།བུམ།མག་པ།
ས་རྒྱལ་བཅུ་གཅིག།
White W(i): royal dog Hal-khyi, princess dKar-sham,
བླཁྱབརང་
Sheep year (lug-lo)
Son-in-law sBal-te, eleven ministers of king The-Se
Green E(ii): prime minister Tsang-kun,
royal steed Se'u rang-rta, groom Se'u rta-khrid,
inner position of astrologer Se-ba bla-mkhyen
Green E(i): Pi-ling
White W(ii) (opportune passageway)
Blue Ni):Zin-phung
Blue Ni) (opportune passageway)
Yellow NW: bodyguard Se-shar,
Yellow NE: astrologer Se-ba bla-mkhyen,
chancellor Se-byi, advisor Bla-mkhyen phe'o
sweeper Se-lo sa-'phyag, policeman Kungs-myul
སི་བ་བློན།སི་ཀྱི།
བླམཁྱེན་ལིའུ་
རིནཔསལ།ས་
འཕྱག་ཀུངསམྱལ།
Plate 5, fig. 3 Sheep year.



126
The White Beryl
Monkey year (spre-lo)
ཧལ་ཁྱི་བུ་མོ།
བྱང་རང་རྟ་རྟ་
བྱིང(gcགྱི༌
གནའཕྱེའོ།
Red S(i): royal dog Hal-khyi, princess dkar-sham,
son-in-law sBal-te, assistant Khyi-mg0, Pi-ling
Red S(ii): queen mother The-khyem,
prime minister Tsang-kun
Yellow SW: bodyguard Se-shar,
time-keeper Se-bya, policeman Kungs-myul
ཁྱི།བྱེད་པོ་ཀུས་ཚུལ། །
སེམས་བྱ།
ཙང་ཀུན། །
དམག་དཔོན།
1 ཐེ་སེ། ཧ་རྗེ་གདན་
རིས། གཟུག།
Yellow SE: dog-walker Bya-ra-ba, royal steed
Se'u rang-rta, groom Se'u rta-khrid,
general Vang-ging, adjutant Tsang-kun 'phye'o
Green E(ii) (opportune passageway)
general Tsang-kun
White W(i): king The-se, queen Hang-ne, upholsterer
Monkey year (spre-lo)
Se-ba gdan-'dings, hidden spirit gzig-mjug
Green E(i): astrologer Se-ba bla-mkhyen,
སི་བ་བླ་མཁྱེན་པས་
སྲས་བུ་
ཐམཁྱེན་གསཔ།
prince Ie-S0
White W(ii): secret position of
astrologer Se-ba bla-mkhyen
Yellow NW: chancellor Se-byi nor-srungs,
Yellow NE: Zin-phung,
Blue Nii): inner position of astrologer
Blue N(i): sweeper Se-lo sa-'phyag
རླིང་ས་རྒྱལ་བཅུ་ཀུན་དང།
eleven ministers of king The-se
Se-ba bla-mkhyen
advisor Bla-mkhyen phe'o
་་སེ་ལེ་ས་འཕུག།
མཁྱེན་ལེའུ།
Plate 5, fig. 3 Monkey year.
Bird year (bya-10)
Yellow SE: bodyguard Se-shar,
adjutant Tsang-kun 'phye'o
Yellow SW: queen mother The-khyem,
རང་རྟ་རྟ་ཁྲིད་
བློ ན་བོ་ཙང་ཀུན།: ཐེ་ཁྱིམ་ཀློན་
Red S(i): royal steed Se'u rang-rta,
groom Se'u rta-khrid
Red Sci): prime minister Tsang-kun,
assistant Khyi-mgo, eleven ministers of king The-se
ཚ
།
ཡིའུ་ཐམག་དཔོན།
chancellor Se-byi nor-srungs,
advisor Bla-mkhyen phe'o, general Tsang-kun
Green E(ii): astrologer Se-ba bla-mkhyen,
སེ་བ་བླ་མཁྱེན།
སློང་གིང་དེང་ལ།
general Vang-ging dmar-p0
བླམ@་གསང་། །
།
Green E(i): royal dog Hal-khyi, princess dKar-sham,
Bird year (bya-lo)
White W(i): time-keeper Se-bya,
secret position of astrologer Se-ba bla-mkhyen
White W(ii): king The-se, queen Hang-ne,
upholsterer Se-ba gdan-'dings, inner position of
astrologer Se-ba bla-mkhyen, hidden spirit He-thon
Yellow NW: policeman Kungs-myul
son-in-law sBal-te, Zin-phung
Asiakalakastat
，
Yellow NE: dog-walker Hang-phan bya-ra-ba,
Blue N(ii): sweeper Se-lo sa-'phyag
Blue N(i): prince Te-so
ཧལ་ཁྱི་བུ་མོ་མགོཔ།
ཐིན་ཕུང༌།
དང་ཕན་བྱ་རབ། |ཨེ་ལེས་འཕྱག།
པི་ལིང་། །
Pi-ling
ཏ་སེ་སྲས་པོ།
ཀུངས་ཚུལ།
Plate 5, fig. 3 Bird year.
Dog year (khyi-lo)
Yellow SE: astrologer Se-ba bla-mkhyen,
Red S(i) (opportune passageway)
Red S(ii): prime minister Tsang-kun,
chancellor Se-byi nor-srungs, eleven ministers
royal steed Se'u rang-rta, groom Se'u rta-khrid,
སུངས།ས་རྒྱལ་༡༡
བློ་མཁྱེན་ཕེའུ།
ཀློན་པོ་མྱོང་ཀུན་བབ། ཀུས་སྤྱལ་ཙཨཀུན་
དུ་ཁྲིད། ར འཕྱིའོད།ཁྱི་མགོ་ཟླ་
མཁྱེན་གསང།
ཐོ་ཁྱིམ་དེས་སྲས་པོ།
YellowSW: policemanKungs-myul,
adjutant Tsang-kun 'phye'o,
assistant Khyi-mgo, secret position of
of king The-se, advisor Bla-mkhyen phe'o
Pi-ling, inner position of astrologer
Se-ba bla-mkhyen
Green E(ii): Zin-phung
Dog year (khyi-lo)
Green E(l) (opportune passageway)
Yellow NE: bodyguard Se-shar,
sweeper Se-lo sa-'phyag, general Vang-ging
astrologer Se-ba bla-mkhyen
White W(i): queen mother The-khyem, prince Te-so
White W(ii): time-keeper Se-bya
Yellow NW: king The-se, queen Hang-ne, upholsterer
Se-ba gdan-'dings, dog-walker Bya-ra-ba, general
Blue N(ii) (opportune passageway)
Blue N(): royal dog Hal-khyi, princess dkar-sham,
སེ་བྱ།དུས་འཛིན།
son-in-law sBal-te
Tsang-kun, hidden spirit Byi-dur
སེའམ་གསེར་ས་
འཕྲུག་ཆུང་ཤིང་།
བཏུལgབུ
་ སི་ཏཔའི་ག
དམག་དཔོན་བྱི་དུར།
Plate 5, fig. 3 Dog year.
Pig year (phag-lo)
།
།
Yellow SE: Zin-phung, Pi-ling
Red S(ii) (opportune passageway)
ཟིན་ཕུང་པི་ལིང༌། །སེལ་ཐུགཁྱེན་ཏེ་
རང་རྟལྟཁྲིད་བྱས་བ།
ཙང་ཀུན་འཕྱེའོ།།
Red S(i): astrologer Se-ba bla-mkhyen,
prince Te-so, general Vang-ging
ས་སུས་ལོ་/
Yellow SW: royal steed Se'u rang-rta, groom
Se'urta-khrid, dog-walker Bya-ra-ba,
adjutant Tsang-kun 'phye'o
Green E(ii): inner position of
ཧལ་ཁྱི་བུ་མོ།མག་བ།
ཀྱི་མགོ།
White W(i): royal dog Hal-khyi, princess dkar-sham,
s0n-in-law sBal-te, assistant Khyi-mg0
astrologer Se-ba bla-mkhyen
Pig year (phag-lo)
Green E(i): sweeper Se-lo sa-'phyag
White W(ii): queen mother The-khyem,
prime minister Tsang-kun
པ་ལས་འབབ།
ཟེ་མཚོན་བོ་ཚོང་ཀུན།
Blue N(i): king The-se, queen Hang-ne,
Yellow NE: chancellor Se-byi nor-srungs,
policeman Kungs-myul, advisor Bla-mkhyen phe'o
Blue N(ii): eleven ministers of king The-se,
secret position of astrologer Se-ba bla-mkhyen
Yellow NW: bodyguard Se-shar,
time-keeper Se-bya, general Tsang-kun
ཤང།སེg
upholsterer Se-ba gdan-'dings,
hidden spirits gNyan-khra and Phyug-po
སེ་བྱེ། ཀུཕྲུལ་ས་རྒྱལ་བཅིག། ཐེསེ་ཧངནོ།གདན
བླo@ན་ལིའུ། མནབས་གཞན་ལ་གོ་བ་
དམག་དཔོན་
Plate 5, fig. 3 Pig year.



127
Geomantic aspects of the years, months, days and hours
Spirit lords of the months (White Beryl, ff. 455b-469b)
Spirit lords of the months, illustrations taken from White Beryl, Derge
edition, Chapter 31. 1 'Brug-Iha. 2 The-se 'grum-bu. 3 Zla-grungs.
4 Zla-bali se-rgyal bcu-gcig. 5 Sa-dmag. 6 Sa-sman. 7 Sa-yi Iha-mo
bstan-ma. 8 rGan-rgon. 9 Nang-lha. 10 Byi-lam phag-mgo. 11 Byi-
lam sngon-mo. 12 rNga-zor dmar-po. 13 'Phar-ba mgo-dgu. 14 Srid-
gshed. 15 Pi-ling. 16 Pi-ling 'phar-ma. 17 Zla-ba'i tsang-kun. 18 Be-
sna lag-chen. 19 Gyal-mo bzhi. 20 Thab-Iha se-shar. 21 Vang-khyi.
22 Grol-bu lha Inga.
Among the 124 moving spirit lords of the months, which are enumerated in White Beryl, the largest group comprises the sixty-four of
inauspicious nature, which all arise jointly on the first day of each lunar month. These include: 'Brug-lha, The-se 'grum-bu, Zla-grungs,
Bla-dngos, Zla-ba'i se-rgyal bcu-gcig, Lha-bran 'khor-bu, gNam-gyi bya-ma gung-rgyal, sBra-lha phyir-'gro, Sa-dmag, Sa-sman, Sa-yi
lha-mo bstan-ma, rGan-rgon, Nang-lha, Byi-lam phag-mgo, Byi-lam sngon-mo, rNga-zor dmar-po, 'Phar-ba mgo-dgu, Srid-gshed, Sa-
khyi dud-kha-pho, Sa-khyi nad-mo tho-lum-mo, Pi-ling, Zin-'phung, Zla-ba'i bla-mkhyen, Nal-bu, Sa-yi byi-lam, Pi-ling 'phar-ma, Lha-
chen, gNyan-chen, gZig-mjug, gZig-slog, sDom-khyi, Zla-ba'i tsang-kun, rNgam-pa, Be-sna lag-chen, rGyal-mo bzhi, Thab-lha se-shar,
Vang-khyi and rТsang-tsid. In addition to these fifty, which are enumerated in the so-called dmar-rtsis tradition, a further sixteen are
added according to the rNying-chen gsal-ba'i sgron-me, comprising: Grol-bu lha Inga; along with Zhag-lha, Dus-lha, Khyim-nang lha,
Thang-lha, Shing-lha, Se-yi lha, Ro-lam lha, sPyi'i lha and gTad-lha.
3 Beds
11
IS
10
18
3097
NE h.
2011
25
01
Es



128
The White Beryl
White Beryl then describes the other groups of monthly spirit lords, including the ‘male and female black celestial dogs' (gnam-khyi nag-
pho-mo), whose varying positions and influences are given along with illustrations on ff. 454a-455a. In brief, they are said to be encoun-
tered on the first day of the mid-spring month in the mouse year, on the fourth of the last spring month in the ox year, on the seventh of
the first summer month in the tiger year, on the ninth of the mid-summer month in the hare year, on the twenty-sixth of the last summer
month in the dragon year, on the ninth of the first autumn month in the snake year, on the nineteenth of the mid-autumn month in the
horse year, on the seventh of the last autumn month in the sheep year, on the sixteenth of the first winter month in the monkey year, on
the nineteenth of the mid-winter month in the bird year, on the twenty-fourth of the last winter month in the dog year, and on the eighth
of the first spring month in the mouse year.
There are also monthly considerations to be made regardless of the positions of these spirit lords. In this context,
each of the twelve directions has its own negative impact. For example, it is said that if a corpse is taken out in the north-west direction
during the first spring month, three other corpses will follow (f. 456a).
Black months are calculated in various ways. According to the Phug-pa school, for example, the months of a
‘fourth removed adversarial year-sign’ (bzhi-gshed) preceding or following the present year is black, while the first part of a first seasonal
month, the mid-part of a mid-seasonal month and the final part of a last seasonal month are also black. Actions should be avoided on
specific days during these periods.
Following further intricate calculations – which concern the positions of the 'serpent-bellied spirit lord 1To'-
phye, who has a particular geomantic importance for mandala construction (ff. 4636–465a)? – the White Beryl then describes the computa-
tion of the ‘spirit lords of the nine black months' (zla-ba'i nag-mo dgu-skor) through the twelve months of the year. For example, during
the mouse month, rGyal-po mtshon-thogs is in the east, Nag-mo khyo-med and sTag-gzig sna-dus in the south-east, gShin-rje zas-'brog
in the south, Bus-pa rta-bdud, gShed-po dur-'debs and Ka-la ro-zan in the west, Nad-bdud mgo-gcod byi-ba is in the north-west, and
sMe-ba bla-mkhyen in the north-east.
The minor spirit lords (sil-ma'i sa-bdag), who are subsequently enumerated on ff. 4655–468b, include Tshes-
gnyan ro-dgu, Se-bdud, gShin-gyi pho-rog, mChe-ba-can, Dur-len, Thab-lha se-shar, Grol-bu lha-Inga, gNyan-khra drug, Ku-ku,
sNang-sel khrab-gyon, gNam-gyi bya-khyung heng-phan and 'Gram-gyi sa-bdag 'phye-ba, as well as the ‘six dark-yellow celestial line’
spirits (gnam-thig ser-nag drug), namely: bSas-khang, gSer-dbang, gNam-mdzod, Shel-khang, rNam-thos and Tshe-dbang; the so-called
'six black spirits of shade' (sribs-kyi nag-drug), named: 'Brug-sngon, gNam-gshed, Chu-tshags, sTag-dkar, Hang-bu and Ke-tshigs; and
the ‘five spirit lords of further insistence' (yang-khol sa-bdag Inga, ff. 468b-469a), who comprise: gNam-gyi gza'-chen lha-rgod, Bar-gyi
khyab-'jug ra-hu, Sa-yi 'phung-gyed nag-mo Klu-gza' nag-mo and gCer-bu lag-rdum.
There are additionally ‘twelve hidden spirit lords' (gab-pa'i sa-bdag bcu-gnyis) named gNyan-khra, gNyan-ljang,
Bya-khyung, Rus-sbal ser-po, Ba-dan ser-po, Tsang-kun, Byi-lam, Be-sna, gZig-mjug, Byi-dur, He-thon and Phyug-po, whose positions
correspond respectively to the twelve animal signs, from mouse onwards, whether representing the years, months, days or hours.
Spirit lords of the months, illustrations taken from White Beryl, Derge
edition, Chapter 31. 1 'Male black celestial dog'. 2 'Female black
celestial dog'. 3 ITO'-phye. 4 Tshes-gnyan ro-dgu. 5 Se-bdud.
6gShin-gyi pho-rog. 7 gNyan-khra drug. 8 Thab-Iha se-shar. 9 mChe
ba-can. 10 Dur-len. 11 Ku-ku. 12 Ba-dan ser-po. 13 sNang-sel
khrab-gyon. 14 gNam-gyi bya-khyung heng-phan. 15 'Gram-gyi sa-
bdag 'phye-ba.
202
Stre
Wurz
Wis
13



129
Geomantic aspects of the years, months, days and hours
Plate 6, fig. 3 (Ms I: ff. 25–30): Geomantic obstacles and opportune passageways associated with the months (zla-ba'i sa-bdag 'gag-'gro lam)
སྲིད་ག༤ཉིད། །
ST
ཤེལ་ཁཔ།
Tiger month with Sagittarius (stag-zla)
Yellow SE: gSer-dbang, Bya-ma
Red S(i): Srid-gshed, Bla-mkhyen,
Red S(ii): rТsang-rtsad (with head
Red S(iii): sTag-dkar
Yellow SW: Shel-khang
(double negative)
rNam-thos (double negative)
facing south and mouth to the west)
(double positive)
(double negative)
NOM
5
Yellow SE:
Red S(i): spine of To'-phye
Red S(ii): upper body of To'-phye
Yellow SW:
496a JARALI
ག ས་སྨོན་མཛད་གཏམ།xx
༧ རྒན་རྒོན་མགོནུབ།
འབྲུག་ལྷ་བྲི་སེ་ཀྲུམ་བུ།
lower body of
neck of
White W(i): Zla-grungs, Pi-ling,
Green E(iii): Chu-tshags
White W(i): 'Phar-ba, Sa-sman,
ན་སུ་
11
(double positive)
gNam-mdzod
411
སྐུལ་ _ མཛེ། སྒོ་
ནམ་
ས་དམ[ 14ཡནམ། ཕྱི
ANU'AUT
ས་རྒྱལ་བཞུགཙཔཀུན་
startad e
nal
(double negative)
White W(ii): rGan-rgon
1024XH2A5F
Green E(i): 'Brug-lha, The-se grum-bu,
gNyan, Byi-lam sngon-mo, Bran-lha,
XX
(head facing west)
rGyal-mo, Thab-ser
ITo'-phye, right fang
ITo'-phye, left fang
Green E(ii):
head, i.e. head
buttocks of
Tiger month with Sagittarius (stag-zla)
of To'-phye
ITo'-phye
Green E(i):
Nang-lha in the centre (nang-lha dbus), six spirits of shade at the outer door White W(ii):
tail of
(nag-drug phyi-sgo)
mouth of
ITo'-phye
ITO'-phye
Yellow NE: Blue N(ii): penis of To'-phye
Blue N(i): abdomen of To'-phye
Yellow NW:
bottom of
collar bone of
ITo'-phye
ITo'-phye
Blue N(iii): bs Tan-ma, 'Brug-sngon, Blue N(ii): Zla-ba'i se-rgyal,
Blue N(i): Ke-tshigs (double positive),
sDom-khyi (double positive)
Tsang-kun (mouth facing north), Zin-phung, Be-sna, Hal-khyi, Tsang-kun
gZig-mjug, Byi-lam phag, Lha-chen
Plate 6, fig. 3 Tiger month with Sagittarius.
White W(iii): Hang-bu
(double positive)
Green E(i): Zla-dngos, gZig-slog,
gNam-gshed, Sa-khyi, rNgam-pa
(double positive), sBra-lha
Yellow NE: Sa-dmag, bSas-khang
(double negative)
Yellow NW: rNga-zor, Byi-lam, 'Phar-ma
(double negative), Tshe-dbang
Hare month with Capricorn (yos-zla)
Yellow SW: rNam-thos, Bya-ma
པ་ཤིང་
རྣམས་བྱས།
Yellow SE: The-se grum-bu, Sa-dmag,
Byi-lam phag, gNam-gshed, Sa'i byi-lam
(double negative)
oo
ХХ
(double positive)
གྲུམ་བུ་ས་རམག་ཕྱི་ཟླ་དྲུངས།ལྔཟེར་འཕརབ| ཙིང་མག་
manager maarja
གཡོ་གའོད།
& St
a
U9
aga en fata
NAKTIS
1970
རྒན་རྒོན་མགོ་ནུབ།
ann sinn
White Wi): sTag-dkar,
Green E(ii): Zla-dngos, bSas-khang,
Sa-khyi, gZig-slog, rNgam-pa
Red S(i): Zla-grungs, rNga-zor,
Red S(ii): rТsang-rtsad (head facing Red Sili): Sring-gshed, gSer-dbang
'Phar-ba (double positive),
south and mouth to the west), Bran-Iha, (double negative)
Chu-tshags, 'Phar-ma
rNgam-pa phag-mgo
Yellow SE: Red S(i): lower body of ITO'-phye Red S(ii): back of ITO'-phye, mouth Yellow SW:
buttocks of
shoulder-blade of
ITo'-phye, right fang
ITo'-phye, left fang
Green E(ii):
White W(i):
tail of
Hare month with Capricorn (yos-zla)
neck of
ITo'-phye
ITo'-phye
Green E(i):
Nang-Iha in the centre (nang-lha dbus), six 'spirits of shade' at the 'luck stake' White W(ii):
bottom of
(nag-drug gyang-shing)
head, i.e. head
ITo'-phye
of ITO'-phye
Yellow NE: Blue Nii): abdomen of ITO'-phye Blue N(): collar bone of ITO'-phye
Yellow NW:
penis of
mouth of
བསྟནམ་ཡི་ཁབ།
á
Hal-khyi (double positive)
dar
mgales
Oo
(double negative)
Green E(ii): 'Brug-lha, gNyan,
White W(ii): rGan-rgon
295
VaR
Ta'an
གནམ་མཛོད།
Byi-lam sngon-po, rGyal-mo, Thab-ser
(head facing west)
Green E(i): 'Brug-sngon
Plate 6, fig. 3 Hare month with Capricorn.
White W(iii): bs Tan-ma, Pi-ling,
Shel-khang (double positive), Sa-sman
(double negative)
ITO'-phye
Blue N(ii): Tshe-dbang, sDom-khyi
Blue N(ii): Lha-chen
Yellow NE: Zla-ba'i sa-rgyal bcu-gcig,
Be-sna, gZig-mjug, Ke-tshigs
ITo'-phye
Blue N(i): Hang-bu
(double positive), sBra-Iha
Yellow NW:gNam-mdzod
(mouth facing north)
(double negative)
(double negative), Tsang-kun,
Zin-phung, Bla-mkhyen
(double positive)
Dragon month with Aquarius ('brug-zla)
Yellow SE: Zla-dngos, Sa-khyi,
:21 2019'4kings
གནས་ཀྱི་འབྲུག་ བwན་མ།
འབརྔས་བསོས་ནང་
h
alal you
'Brug-sngon, gZig-slog, rNgam-pa
Yellow SW: Sa-dmag, Srid-gshed,
Byi-lam phag, Sa'i byi-lam, Bla-mkhyen,
Chu-tshags (double positive)
9
Red S(i): bsTan-ma, Hal-khyi,
Red S(ii): rТsang-rtsad (head facing Red S(iii): Nga-zor dmar-po,
bSas-khang (double negative)
south and mouth facing west)
Byi-lam sngon-po, 'Phar-ma,
gNam-gshed (double positive)
Yellow SE: Red S(i): buttocks of To'-phye
Red Sci): lower body of ITo'-phye, mouth Yellow SW:
tail of
back of
(double positive)
Ta
མཇུག། །
r
hamurai
193
ཀཚིགས། ཟི་སྣ།
ཕྲུག་སྤྱི་ཆེན་ས་ལ་འཇུག།
གླ། སོག་|
| བྲན་ལྷ། མགོ་ནུག།
ITo'-phye, right fang
Green E(ii)
ITO'-phye, left fang
White W(i):
Age
Green E(iii): Ke-tshigs, Be-sna
རྣམ་ཐས།
White W(i): 'Phar-ba,
gSer-dbang, sBra-Iha (double negative)
(double positive)
bottom of
Dragon month with Aquarius ('brug-zla)
shoulder-blade
ITO'-phye
of To'-phye
1959leise
kall
t
Green E(1):
Nang-lha at the door (nang-lha sgo), The-se the-grum at the threshold (the-grum
White W(ii):
White W(ii): Bran-lha (head facing west)
99
AS
Green E(ii): 'Brug-Iha, rGan-rgon
Zla-ba'i sa-rgyal bcu-gcig, gZig-mjug,
gNyan, Vang-gi rgyal-po, Thab-ser
penis of
ther
of shade' at the water mill
neck of
O
ITo'-phye
(nag-drug rang-'thag
ITo'-phye
Plate 6, fig. 3 Dragon month with Aquarius.
(looking east at the hour of the mouse)
Green E(i): Zla-grungs, Tshe-dbang
Yellow NE:
Blue N(ii): collar bone of To'-phye
Blue N(i): mouth of ITo'-phye
Yellow NW:
White Wiii): rNam-thos
(double negative)
abdomen of
head i.e.
(double negative)
ITo'-phye
head of To'-phye
Yellow SW: Zin-phung, Tsang-kun,
Blue N(iii): gNam-mdzod
Blue N(ii): Lha-chen
Blue Ni): Shel-khang
Yellow NW: Pi-ling, sTag-dkar, Bya-ma
Hang-bu (double positive)
(double negative), sDom-khyi
(mouth facing north)
(double negative)
(double positive), Sa-sman



130
The White Beryl
Snake month with Pisces (sbrul-zla)
NEPLASATR
hermaux
Yellow SE: Zla-ba'i sa-rgyal bcu-gcig,
Yellow SW: Byi-lam sngo,
bSas-khang, Be-sna, 'Phar-ma
ANE Only fewer
1491
ཁང་།བས་འཕུའ''
all xx
acak kitaniakaian
ནང་ལྷ་སྒཤུལ| གཤེད། ༠༠
*** kasvattaraya
gZig-mjug, Tshe-dbang
(double negative)
Red S(i): Zla-dngos, Ke-tshigs, gZig-slog, Red S(ii): 'Brug-Iha, The-se,
Red S(iii): Nga-zor,
Sa-khyi, rNgam-pa
rGyal-mo, Byi-lam phag,
'Brug-sngon
(double positive)
Sa'i byi-lam, gNyan, Thab-ser
(double positive)
Yellow SE: Red S(i): tail of To'-phye
Red S(ii): buttocks of ITO'-phye
(double negative)
Yellow SW:
bottom of
རྒནགོན་ཁ
ITo'-phye
lower body of
ITo'-phye, right fang
White W(i):
བསྟནམ། འབར་བ]ག3%E:
Green E(ii):
anal
Green E(ii): Hang-bu, sDom-khyi
(double positive)
White W(i): Srid-gshed, gNam-gshed
(double positive)
penis of
Snake month with Pisces (sbrul-zla)
back of
no
ITo'-phye
ITo'-phye, mouth
1:|:དེལ་ཁ་བྱ་མ།
༢
ཡག་བྱS། ::4མས། པ་ལངས་དམག་
གསར་དབང།
Green E(ii): rGan-rgon (mouth to
Green E(i):
Nang-lha at the door (nang-Iha sgo), Nal-bu at the roof (nal-bu thog) and
White W(i):
White W(ii): rТsang-rtsad
(head facing west and mouth to the north)
the east), Lha-chen
abdomen of
six spirits of shade' at the rope (nag-drug thag-pa)
shoulder-blade
ITO'-phye
Plate 6, fig. 3 Snake month with Pisces.
of ITo'-phye
Yellow NW:
Yellow NE:
Blue N(ii): mouth of ITO'-phye
Blue N(i): head, i.e. head of ITo'-phye
White W(i): Chu-tshags, sBra-lha
(double positive)
neck of
Green E(i): bs Tan-ma, 'Phar-ba,
gNam-mdzod, Tsang-kun, Bla-mkhyen,
Hal-khyi, Zin-phung (double negative)
Yellow NE: Shel-khang, Bya-ma
(double negative)
collar bone
of To'-phye
Blue N(iii): sTag-dkar
(double positive)
Blue N(ii): Bran-lha
ITo'-phye, left fang
Blue N(): Zla-grungs, Pi-ling, rNam-thos,
Sa-sman (double negative)
Yellow NW: Sa-dmag, gSer-dbang
(head facing north)
(double negative)
Horse month with Aries (rta-zla)
Red S(ii): 'Brug-lha, rGan-rgon, Zla-ba'i
Red Sciii): Zla-dngos, bs Tan-ma,
པནམང་སྦྱང ས་དམག།
g'alga S
།འབྲུག་ལྷ།རྒན་ས་རྒྱལ་ཟླ་དངོས་ཁམནམ། ཐོས་གྲུམ་
aison 1
991
Yellow SE:gNam-mdzod, sBra-Iha,
Bya-ma (double negative)
Red S(i): Sa-dmag, Hang-bu
(double positive)
Yellow SW: The-se grum-bu, Ke-tshigs
(double positive)
sa-rgyal bcu-gcig, Byi-lam sngo, gZig-m
Tshe-dbang, gZig-slog,
ICONI
od
Acad
e
aban anaky/24X ALAL
jug, gNyan, rGyal-mo, Thab-ser Sa-khyi, rNgam-pa
Red S(i): bottom of ITo'-phye
Red S(ii): tail of ITO'-phye
Yellow SE:
Yellow SW:
བྷལgཀབ
། འབྲུག་སྦྱིན། བསོ་
OO
penis of
buttocks of
L9Hostels
0_zaprastafa margsly
ITO'-phye
ITo'-phye, right fang
2
VES
2
Green E(ii):
White W(i):
Green E(iii): Shel-khang, sDom-khyi,
Zin-phung, Tsang-kun (double negative)
White W(i): Zla-grungs, 'Phar-ba mgo,
'Brug-sngon (double positive)
abdomen of
Horse month with Aries (rta-zla)
ITo'-phye
RETO
ang karangal
load Tabarak
ནི་སེང་མགོ་བྱཔ་བྱམས་
p
oll'at923
lower body of
ITo'-phye, mouth
White W(ii):
Green E(i):
Nang-lha at the house (nang-lha khyim), Nal-bu at the pillars (nal-bu ka-ba)
White W(ii): rТsang-rtsad
<ག•gs༦ ཚེ
བྱམམ།
Green E(ii): Lha-chen, Bran-Iha
(mouth facing east)
collar bone
and six 'spirits of shade' at the door (nag-drug sgo)
back of
(head facing south and mouth to the north)
oo
of ITO'-phye
ITo'-phye
Plate 6, fig. 3 Horse month with Aries.
Green E(i): Nga-zor, sTag-dkar, 'Phar-ma
Yellow NE:
Blue N(ii): head, i.e. head of ITO'-phye
Blue N(i): neck of ITo'-phye
Yellow NW:
shoulder-blade of
White W(iii): Srid-gshed, Bla-mkhyen,
bSas-khang (double negative)
(double positive)
mouth of
ITo'-phye
Yellow NE: rNam-thos, Sa'i byi-lam
(double negative)
Blue N(ii): Pi-ling, gSer-dbang, Sa-sman
(double positive)
Blue Ni): Byi-lam phag
(head facing north)
ITo'-phye, left fang
Blue N(i): Chu-tshags, Be-sna, Hal-khyi
(double positive)
Yellow NW:gNam-gshed
(double positive)
Sheep month with Taurus (lug-zla)
SRL
ལྷག་པར།
ཟླ་དངས་ནང་ལྷ་ས་
Yellow SE: sTag-dkar, Bla-mkhyen,
Zin-phung (double positive),
Red S(I): Zla-grungs, Shel-khang
(double negative)
Red S(ii): 'Brug-Iha, rGan-rgon
phag-mgo, Bran-Iha, rGyal-mo, gNyan,
Thab-ser, Vang-khyi (hour of the ox)
Red S(iii): gNam-mdzod
(double negative)
siis 291
བྱིགུང་སྟོན་པ།་ཐོས།
Yellow SW: Zla-dngos, Nang-Iha,
Zla-ba'i sa-rgyal bcu-gcig, Sa-khyi,
Hang-bu, gZig-slog, rNgam-pa, gZig-
mjug, Bya-ma (double positive)
X
Tsang-kun
4
2
| མངརྒྱཁ་ མཇུག བསྟནམ་ཚུ་དབང
Gar
55414
ga
TELAH
53
JUNI
4
x
x
Yellow SE:
Red S(i): penis of To'-phye
Red S(ii): bottom of ITo'-phye
Yellow SW:
14
abdomen of
tail of
22
ITo'-phye
ITo'-phye, right fang
Green E(iii): Byi-lam sngon-po,
Green E(ii):
White W(i):
White W(i): bsTan-ma, Tshe-dbang,
OO
rNam-thos, 'Phar-ma, sBra-Iha,
collar bone
Sheep month with Taurus (lug-zla)
buttocks of
Hal-khyi (double negative)
SACI
24401
མག། གཞལ | སོག་ ཤུལ་
ཟོལ་མེང༌།ཆུ
4041
གནམ་གཤེད། །མག་བྱང༌།
! ། སཔ་གོཤིར། འབག་
གསས་བS།
ཟ་སྟ། སྤྱི་ལམ་ཐག། །
20147447
sDom-khyi (double negative)
of ITo'-phye
ITo'-phye, mouth
Green E(ii): Lha-chen (mouth facing
Green E(i):
mGon at the door of the house (mgon khang-sgo), The-se the-grum below the stove
White W(ii):
OO
White W(ii): The-se, rТsang-rtsad
(head facing west and mouth to north)
east), Sa'i byi-lam
mouth of
(the-grum thab-'og) and six 'spirits of shade' at the basin (nag-drug gzhong-pa)
Plate 6, fig. 3 Sheep month with Taurus
ITo'-phye
lower body
of ITO'-phye
Yellow NW:
Green E(i): gSer-dbang
Yellow NE:
Blue N(ii) neck of ITo'-phye
Blue N(i): shoulder-blade of To'-phye
White W(iii): Ke-tshigs
(double negative)
head, i.e. head
back of
(double positive)
of ITo'-phye
ITo'-phye, left fang
Blue N(ii): (head facing north)
Blue N(i): 'Phar-ba 'go, bSas-khang
Yellow NW: Srid-gshed, 'Brug-sngon
Yellow NE: Nga-zor, Pi-ling, Chu-tshags,
Sa-sman, Be-sna, Byi-lam phag
Blue N(iii): gNam-gshed
(double positive)
(double negative), Sa-dmag
(double positive)



131
Geomantic aspects of the years, months, days and hours
Plate 7, fig. 3 (Ms l: ff. 31-34): Geomantic obstacles and opportune passageways associated with the months (zla-ba'i sa-bdag 'gag-'gro lam), continued
assifl
དབང། འཕ༢ | | |
གྲྭ་ལ་
o ra
A .
TGES
Tagare
Monkey month with Gemini (spre-zla)
Yellow SE (Byi-lam sngo, gSer-dbang,
'Phar-ma (double negative)
Yellow SW: Shel-khang
by H&SARA
gare
Red S(i): rNam-thos, Zin-phung, Red S(ii): Lha-chen, Sa'i byi-lam
Red S(iii): sTag-dkar, sDom-khyi
Tsang-kun, Hal-khyi (double negative) (mouth facing south), Byi-lam phag-mgo (double positive)
Yellow SE: Red S(i): abdomen of ITo'-phye
Red S(ii): penis of To'-phye
Yellow SW:
(double negative)
Então aj 123°4++
collar bone
bottom of
N
of To'-phye
འབྲུག་སྨྱོ་ཐོ་རྩེ་གམ་བུདས་
paštas galima
lov zmiana bang macan
སྨད། ཧང་ཤུབས་
མ་ག གང་
e
15613ac1219
གཞི་གཞང།ས་སྨན
ITo'-phye
n
y
། སོགི་ | ཨུལ།
Green E(ii):
White W(i):
Green E(iii): bs Tan-ma, 'Phar-ba,
Be-sna (double positive), Chu-tshags
White W(i): Zla-dngos, Sa-khyi,
gNam-mdzod, gZig-slog, rNgam-pa
mouth of
Monkey month with Gemini (spre-zla)
tail of
tadták
St1 You
ITo'-phye
ITo'-phye
འཐོར་བས་
teleosto
Green E(i): (head facing east)
Plate 7, fig. 3 Monkey month with Gemini.
Green E(i):
Nang-lha in the courtyard (nang-lha khyams), Nal-bu at the outer door White W(ii):
head, i.e. head
(nal-bu phyi-sgo) and six 'spirits of shade' at the knife (nag-drug gri) buttocks of
of ITO'-phye
ITo'-phye
Yellow NE: Blue N(ii) shoulder-blade of
Blue N(i): back of To'-phye
Yellow NW:
neck of
ITo'-phye, mouth
lower body of
ITo'-phye, left fang
ITo'-phye, right fang
Blue N(iii): 'Brug-sngon, sBra-Iha Blue N(ii): rGan-rgon, rТsang-rtsad Blue N(i): Srid-gshed, Bla-mkhyen,
(double positive)
(head facing north and mouth to east) Ke-tshigs (double positive)
White Wii): 'Brug-lha, The-se grum-
bu, Zla-ba'i sa-rgyal bcu-gcig, rGyal-
mo, Thab-ser, Bran-Iha, gZig-mjug, gNyan
White W(iii): Hang-bu
(double positive)
Green E(i): Zla-grungs, Pi-ling
(double positive), Sa-dmag,
gNam-gshed, Sa-sman
Yellow NE: Nga-zor, bSas-khang
Yellow NW: Tshe-dbang, Bya-ma
(double negative)
(double negative)
Bird month with Cancer (bya-zla)
Yellow SE:gNam-gshed
གལ་གཤེད། །
2012
(double positive)
LAS ASA
aan
མགོ་ཤང་
འ ཁྱམས།
WE4447
བ ས་མག།༠༠
ཐམཚར།རྒྱ་མ།
464 107931
རྐུབ་
F AND14741
Tag 75+41 NIRRET
Green Eci): Pi-ling, Sa-sman,
bSas-khang (double negative)
MOST
Red S(i): Chu-tshags, Bya-ma
Red S(ii): Lha-chen
Red S(iii): gSer-dbang, Tsang-kun, Yellow SW: bsTan-ma, Nga-zor,
(double positive)
(mouth facing south)
sDom-khyi, Zin-phung, sBra-Iha, 'Phar-ba, Be-sna, rNam-thos
Bla-mkhyen
(double negative)
Yellow SE:
Red S(i): collar bone of ITo'-phye Red S(ii): abdomen of To'-phye
Yellow SW:
mouth of
penis of
ITo'-phye
ITo'-phye
Green E(ii):
White W(): White W(i): sTag-dkar, Sa-dmag
head, i.e. head
Bird month with Cancer (bya-zla)
bottom of
(double positive)
of ITO'-phye
ITo'-phye
Green E(i):
Nang-Iha in the courtyard (nang-lha khyams), Nal-bu at the inner door White Wii): White W(ii): Thab-ser, 'Brug-Iha,
neck of
(nal-bu nang-sgo) and six 'spirits of shade' at the plates (nag-drug sder-ma) tail of
rGyal-mo, gNyan
ITo'-phye
ITO'-phye
Yellow NE: Blue N(ii) back of To'-phye
Blue N(i): lower body of ITo'-phye, Yellow NW: White W(ii): Zla-dngos, Sa-khyi,
shoulder-blade
mouth
buttocks body of gZig-slog, rNgam-pa, Shel-khang
of ITO'-phye, left fang
ITO'-phye, right fang (double negative)
Blue N(iii): Srid-gshed, Tshe-dbang Blue N(ii): rGan-rgon, Bran-lha, Blue N(i): Zla-grungs, Byi-lam sngo, Yellow NW: The-se grum-bu, Zla-
(double negative)
rTsang-rtsad (head facing north Hang-bu, 'Phar-ma (double positive) ba'i sa-rgyal bcu-gcig (double negative),
and mouth to east), Byi-lam phag
gNam-mdzod, Sa'i byi-lam, gZig-mjug
Dant 155ml Advera 1491
| OY
Green E(ii): (head facing east)
རིགས།
DO PET 8x
Plate 7, fig. 3 Bird month with Cancer.
Green E(i): 'Brug-sngon, Hal-khyi
(double positive)
Yellow NE: Bya-ma, Ke-tshigs
(double positive)
Dog month with Leo (khyi-zla)
Yellow SE: Sa-dmag, Pi-ling, 'Brug-
Red S): bSas-khang, Thab-ser
Red S(ii): Lha-chen
Syara
Red S(iii): gNam-gshed, sDom-khyi
(double positive)
Yellow SW: Nga-zor, Zin-phung, Chu-
tshags (double positive), Tsang-kun
sngon, Bya-ma, Sa-sman, sBra-Iha
(double negative)
(mouth facing south)
ni maana si
BAA 1931
ས་སྨན།སྒྲ་ལྷོ །༠༠
ཀྱི་རིགས།
ao
(double positive)
ལྟ་འཕྱི་མགོ
1884
do final
ཟླ་རླུས། ཀསེར་དབང་།
Аймхх
Sagan alana
Yellow SE:
Red S(i): mouth of ITo'-phye
Red S(ii): collar bone of ITo'-phye
་ འམ་
TEOS
kogu
Yellow SW:
head, i.e. head
abdomen of
མགཤཔ་ཕྱི་མ་ཕག།
of To'-phye
ITo'-phye
White W(i):
Green E(iii): Ke-tshigs
Green E(ii):
White W(i): Zla-grungs, gSer-dbang
(double negative)
(double positive)
Dog month with Leo (khyi-zla)
penis of
faraj
neck of
ITo'-phye
Green E(i):
ITo'-phye
སྲིད5ན1 ཀྱི་མ་ཕྱིན་
ས་རྒྱལ་མཚུག།
བམནམ
Green E(ii): Byi-lam phag
Nang-lha at the hearth (nang-lha sgyed-bu), Nal-bu at the out-house
White Wii):
White Wii): 'Brug-lha, rGan-rgon,
་ དངོས་འབར་
ALTI
991 go
(head facing east), Bran-Iha
shoulder-blade
bottom of
gNyan, rGyal-mo, Thab-ser, Vang khyi
Boo
of To'-phye
(nal-bu gyang-khang), The-se grum-bu below the water-mill (the-se grum-bu
rang-'thag 'og) and six 'spirits of shade' at the lintel (nag-drug ya-them)
Blue N(ii) lower body of ITo'-phye, Blue N(i): buttocks of ITO'-phye
ITo'-phye
Yellow NW:
(looking west at the hour of the dragon)
White W(ii): rNam-thos
Plate 7, fig. 3 Dog month with Leo.
Green E(): Tshe-dbang
Yellow NE:
(double negative)
back of
mouth
tail of
(double negative)
ITo'-phye, right fang
Yellow NE; Srid-gshed, BLa-mkhyen,
ITo'-phye, left fang
Blue N(ii): Byi-lam sngo, gNam-mdzod,
'Phar-ma (double negative)
Yellow NW: Zla-dngos,
Blue Ni): bs Tan-ma, Be-sna,
Shel-khang (double
Hang-bu (double positive)
'Phar-ba, sTag-dkar, Sa-khyi,
Blue Nii): Zla-ba'l sa-rgyal bcu-gcig,
rTsang-rtsad (head facing north
and mouth facing east), Sa'i byi-lam,
gZig-mjug
negative), Hal-khyi
gZig-slog (double positive), rNgam-pa



132
The White Beryl
UTST
25
a's ASL Agaraat
Y LAK
]༢ཐོབས་དམག།
SHANT
TETAS
Yellow SW: Nga-zor, Sa-dmag,
Pig month with Virgo (phag-zla)
Yellow SE: bsTan-ma, Tshe-dbang
(double negative)
Red S(i): Zla-grungs, Pi-ling,
Sa-sman, Ke-tshigs (double positive)
Red S(ii): Phag-mgo, rGan-rgon,
Bran-Iha (head facing south)
razil
Red S(iii): 'Brug-sngon
(double positive)
Red Sci): mouth of ITo'-phye
xx
Bya-ma, bSas-khang (double negative)
00
994 124
Yellow SE:
Red S(i): head, i.e. head of ITO'-phye
Yellow SW:
2013
stley 9 9• THAI LA
Laajasal
neck of
collar bone
camiqya
..Praza
ITo'-phye, left fang
Green E(iii): Hang-bu
Green E(ii):
White Wi):
of To'-phye
White W(i): Hal-khyi, 'Phar-ba, Tsang-kun,
Zin-phung, gNam-gshed, Bla-mkhyen
gluk
shoulder-blade of
(double positive)
Pig month with Virgo (phag-zla)
abdomen of
སོང་གཤིང།
སྨད་
ཆུ་ཚགས་རྩོམ་གྱི
ITo'-phye, mouth
ITo'-phye
WAREN
...
grigio
འཁོངས: [མ་ཞུག མ་
འབུམ་ལ་སྲི་བུ་བྱ་ངོས། | ཀྱི་
ar45129
Green E(i):
White W(ii):
White Wii): Lha-chen
Pa
m
Green E(ii): rТsang-rtsad
(head facing east and mouth south)
nant tamil
གསར་དབང་།
back of
penis of
(mouth facing west)
Nang-lha at the hearth (nang-Iha gyed-bu, po), gZig-mjug at the door
(gzig-mjug sgo), Nal-bu at the pillar (nal-bu ka-ba) and six spirits of shade'
at the pick-axe (nag-drug 'jon)
Blue Nii) buttocks of To'-phye
Blue N(i): tail of ITO'-phye
ITo'-phye
ITo'-phye
Yellow NE:
Plate 7, fig. 3 Pig month with Virgo.
White W(i): Chu-tshags, sDom-khyi
Yellow NW:
Green E(i): Srid-gshed, gNam-mdzod
(double negative)
lower body of
bottom of
ITo'-phye, right fang
Blue N(ii): sTag-dkar
(double positive)
Yellow NE: Byi-lam sngo, 'Phar-ma,
ITo'-phye
Blue N(i): Zla-dngos, Sa-khyi,
Yellow NW:gSer-dbang
Blue N(ii): 'Brug-Iha, The-se grum-bu,
Thab-ser, Byi-lam phag, gNyan,
rNam-thos, gZig-slog, rNgam-pa
(double negative)
Zla-ba'i sa-rgyal bcu-gcig, sBra-Iha,
Shel-khang, Sa'i byi-lam, Be-sna
rGyal-mo
(double negative)
(double negative)
Plate 8, fig. 3 (Ms I: ff. 35-36): Geomantic obstacles and opportune passageways associated with the months (zla-ba'i sa-bdag 'gag-'gro lam), continued
Mouse month with Libra (byi-zla)
Red S(i): Hang-bu, Hal-khyi
Red S(ii): (head facing south)
Red S(iii): Pi-ling, Sa-sman,
ATALA
Yellow SE: 'Phar-ba, gNam-mdzod
(double negative)
135419232
Yellow SW: Ke-tshigs, Sa'i byi-lam,
Byi-lam phag-mgo (double positive)
(double positive)
Tshe-dbang (double negative)
mara
-
-
Yellow SE:
Red S(i): neck of ITO'-phye
Red S(ii): head, i.e. head of ITo'-phye
Yellow SW:
xx
oo
ཀཚིགས།
Harus 600
| Night
E24H.
འབྲུགལྡན་པ་
Aslator
l ogiste
shoulder-blade of
mouth of
ITo'-phye, left fang
ITo'-phye
Green E(ii):
White WCD):
White W(i): Nga-zor, 'Phar-ma,
391921FMIC
SIA
Green E(ii): Srid-gshed, Bla-mkhyen,
Shel-khang (double negative), Be-sna
back of
Mouse month with Libra (byi-zla)
collar bone
'Brug-sngon (double positive)
ITo'-phye, mouth
བློརླུངས་ སུལ་དཀར་
grua
i foto
TAS
of ITo'-phye
White W(ii)
QNAS(tze
Green E(i):
Nang-lha in the stove (nang-lha thab), Nal-bu at the hearth-stone
Green E(ii): Zla-ba'i sa-rgyal bcu-gcig,
rGan-rgon, rТsang-rtsad (head facing
White W(ii): Lha-chen
(mouth facing west), Bran-Iha
o alimwX1959
lower body of
abdomen of
ཟླ་དངོས་ར་
འབྲུག་ལྷ1g
M
ས་བསྙག་བ་མོ།
བྱམ་ཝཱ་ཉྩ།གན་
4931 00
east and mouth facing south)
ITo'-phye
(nal-bu sgyed-rdo), gZig-mjug at the scales (gzig-mjug rgya-srang) and six
'spirits of shade' at the store-room (nag-drug bang-ba)
Blue N(ii) tail of To'-phye
Blue N(i): bottom of ITO'-phye
ITo'-phye
xx Так,
Yellow NE:
Yellow NW:
White W(iii): Byi-lam sngo, Dom-khyii in
Green E(i): Zla-grungs, sTag-dkar
(double positive)
buttocks of
penis of
red, Tsang-kun in red, bSas-khang
Plate 8, fig. 3 Mouse month with Libra.
ITo'-phye, right fang
ITo'-phye
Yellow NE: The-se grum-bu, rNam-thos
Blue N(ii): 'Brug-lha, Thab-ser,
Blue N(iii): Zla-dngos, rNgam-pa,
Sa-khyi, gSer-dbang (double negative),
gZig-slog
Blue N(i): Chu-tshags
(double negative)
(double negative), Zin-phung
Yellow NW: Sa-dmag, bs Tan-ma,
sBra-Iha, Bya-ma, gNam-gshed
(double positive)
(double negative)
rGyal-mo, gNyan
Ox month with Scorpio (glang-zla)
Yellow SE: Zla-ba'i sa-rgyal bcu-gcig,
LO
AN
Wwwww
Red S(i): Shel-khang
Red S(ii): (head facing south)
Red S(ii): gNam-mdzod
Yellow SW: Pi-ling, sBra-Iha, Sa-sman,
Be-sna, Hang-bu, sTag-gzig
Srid-gshed, sTag-dkar
(double negative)
(double negative)
ཏརེs/
an
ས་རྒྱལ་༡༡།སྲིད་
50ག་ངག་
loo
ང་ཟེར 1:| ཤེས།
གཟིག།
(double positive)
(double positive)
Yellow SE:
Red S(i): shoulder-blade of To'-phye
Red S(ii): neck of ITO'-phye
Yellow SW:
1999 lot
back of
head, i.e. head
ITo'-phye, left fang
of ITo'-phye
White W(): Tshe-dbang
Green E(ii):
White W(i):
Green E(iii): Nga-zor, rNam-thos
(double negative)
lower body of
Ox month with Scorpio (glang-zla)
mouth of
(double negative)
go 16019
Kag merasa
IRRAT
སྐྱོ་ ཤ ཀ་ཚིགས་འཕར་མ་
མཇུག་ རྐུལ་མ
།
ITo'-phye, mouth
ITo'-phye
Green E(ii): Nag-mo, rТsang-rtsad (head
29
Green E(i):
Nang-lha at the stove (nang-Iha thab), The-se grum-bu alongside (the-se
White W(ii):
White Wii): Sa'i byi-lam (mouth facing
facing east and mouth to the south)
grum-bu 'gram), Nal-bu at the hearth-stone (nal-bu gyang-dang rdo), gZig-mjug
west), Lha-chen
La Vás!
HASIS
buttocks of
ITo'-phye
collar bone
of ITO'-phye
O
at the tomb (gzig-mjug dur-sa) and the six 'spirits of shade' at the house-wall
(nag-drug khang-rgyang)
Plate 8, fig. 3 Ox month with Scorpio.
Yellow NE:
Blue N(ii) bottom of ITO'-phye
Blue N(i): penis of ITo'-phye
Yellow NW:
White W(iii): Byi-lam sngo, 'Phar-
Green E(i): gSer-dbang, Hal-khyi
(double negative)
tail of
abdomen of
ma, sDom-khyi, 'Phar-ba, Ke-tshigs
ITo'-phye, right fang
ITo'-phye
(double positive)
Yellow NE: Zla-dngos, bs Tan-ma,
Blue N(iii): gNam-gshed
Yellow NW: 'Brug-sngon, Tsang-kun,
Blue N(i): Zla-grungs
(double negative), bSas-khang
Sa-dmag, Sa-khyi, gZig-slog,
(double positive)
Blue N(ii): 'Brug-Iha, rGan-rgon (head
facing north), Bran-Iha, Byi-lam phag,
rGyal-mo, Vang-khyi (looking northwards
at the hour of the sheep), Thab-ser, gNyan
Zin-phung, Bla-mkhyen
(double positive)
Chu-tshags, rNgam-pa, Bya-ma



133
Geomantic aspects of the years, months, days and hours
WETTUTTO
Spirit lords of the days (White Beryl, ff. 469b-477b)
Spirit lords of the days, illustrations taken from White Beryl, Derge
edition, Chapter 31.1 gTso-bo gser-mdzod ser-po. 2 Pi-ling 'khor-
chung. 3 Rāhula. 4 'Gog-ku Inga.
Among the eighty-one moving spirit lords of the days, there are four principal ones – known as the zhag-lha bzhi – through whose posi-
tions the positive and negative days are calculated. They comprise: gTso-bo gser-mdzod ser-po, Zhag-gi bla-mkhyen, Thab-lha se-shar
and Pi-ling 'khor-chung. Other groups, which have already been mentioned among the spirit lords of the years or months, also have some
influence on the days: notably, the ‘male and female black celestial dog spirits' (gnam-khyi nag-pho-mo); the minor spirits Tshes-gnyan,
gShin-gyi pho-rog, mChe-ba-can and 'Gog-ku; the twelve hidden spirit lords’ (gab-pa'i lha bcu-gnyis); and the spirit lords of further insis-
tence (yang-'khol). The spirit lords of planets and stars (gza'-skar sa-bdag) are found in conjunction with the enemy aspect of the subject's
vitality element, and these sectors are to be avoided.
There is also the category of the deities moving through the days of the month' (tshes-rgyu-ba'i lha), the first of
which determines the ‘greater black days' (nyi-ma nag-chen). In particular, when Rāhula circuits Mount Sumeru in an anti-clockwise
direction, this provokes the so-called ‘nine black omens occurring together' (ngan-pa dgu-'dzoms) on the seventh day of the first spring
month. At that juncture, descending and ascending winds are reversed, horizontal winds are disturbed, the five elements are agitated,
and the sunshine resembles aconite.
Black days are calculated in the manner of black months. For example, in the mouse and horse months, the days of
the bird and hare respectively are black. According to sMon-'gro Pandita, however, the seventh day of the mid-spring month of a mouse
year is black, as are the fifth of the last spring month of an ox year, the seventh of the first summer month of a tiger year, the seventh of
the mid-winter month of a hare year, the twenty-sixth of the last winter month of a dragon year, the ninth of the first autumn month of a
snake year, the nineteenth of the mid-autumn month of a horse year, the seventh of the last autumn month of a sheep year, the sixteenth
of the first winter month of a monkey year, the tenth of the mid-winter month of a bird year, the twenty-first of the last summer month of
a dog year, and the eighth of the first spring month of a pig year.
Plate 3, fig. 4 (Ms l: ff. 13-15): Geomantic obstacles and opportune passageways associated with the days (zhag-gi sa-bdag 'gag-'gro lam)
Mouse day (byi-zhag)
Red S() (Ka-la ro-zan)
Yellow SW: Nad-bdud, gShed-po dur-'debs
སྐྱེ་བ་བླ་མཁྱེན་ ཀ་ལ་རོ་ཟན། །
ཉིད་བདུད་གཤེད་
བྱིས་ཐ་ན་བདུད་
Yellow SE: sMe-ba bla-mkhyen
Green E(ii) (opportune passageway)
Green E(): gShin-rje zas'-'brog
Red S(ii) (opportune passageway)
Mouse day (byi-zhag)
White W(i): Byis-pa rta-bdud
White W(ii) (opportune passageway)
Yellow NW: sTag-gzig sna-dus, Nag-mo khyo-med
Yellow NE (opportune passageway)
Blue N(ii): rGyal-po mtshon-thogs
Blue N() (opportune passageway)
རྒྱལ་པོ་མཚོན་ཐོགས།
སྟག་གཟིག་ནག་མོ།
Plate 3, fig. 4 Mouse day.
Ox day (glang-zhag
Yellow SE: gShed-po dur-'debs
Red Si) (opportune passageway)
གཤིང་པོ།
སྟག་གཟིག་
Red S(ii) (opportune passageway)
Ox day (glang-zhag)
Green E(ii) (opportune passageway)
Yellow SW: sTag-gzig sna-dus
White WC) (opportune passageway)
White W(ii): Byis-pa rta-bdud
V
ཀི་ལ་རོ་
Green E(i): Ka-la ro-zan
Yellow NE: rGyal-po mtshon-thogs,
sMe-ba bla-mkhyen
Blue N(ii) (opportune passageway)
ཁྱིམ་པ་རྟ་བདུད། །
གཤིན། ནགམེ། ན་བདུད།
Yellow NW: Nad-bdud
Blue N(i): gShin-rje zas-'brog,
Nag-mokhyo-med
རྒྱལཾམཚོན་ཐོཊ།སྐྱེ་བ་བློན།
Plate 3, fig. 4 Ox day.
Red S(i) (opportune passageway)
Yellow SW (opportune passageway
སྟག་གཟིག།
Tiger day (stag-zhag)
Yellow SE: STag-gzig sna-dus
Green E(ii) (opportune passageway)
Green E(i): rGyal-po mtshon-thogs
Red S(ii) (opportune passageway)
Tiger day (stag-zhag)
White W(i): gShin-rje zas-'brog
White W(ii) (opportune passageway)
Yellow NW: sMe-ba bla-mkhyen,
རྒྱལ་པོ་མཆོན་ཐོགས།
Yellow NE: gShed-po dur-'debs
Blue N(ii): Nag-mo khyo-med
Blue N(i): Ka-la ro-zan
Byis-pa rta-bdud, Nad-bdud
གཞིར་བ།
ནག་མི
TO
སྐྱེ་བ་བླུནབྱིས་པ་རྟ་བདུད་ད་
Plate 4, fig. 4 (Ms I:ff. 16–19): Geomantic obstacles and opportune passageways associated with the days (zhag-gi sa-bdag 'gag-'gro lam), continued
Plate 3, fig. 4 Tiger day.
Hare day (yos-zhag)
Yellow SE (opportune passageway)
Red S(): gShin-rje zas-'brog
Yellow SW: sMe-ba bla-mkhyen
སྐྱེ་བ་བླམཁྱེན།
ཀ་ལ་ཝིན་
Red S(ii) (opportune passageway)
Hare day (yos-zhag)
Green E(ii): rGyal-po mtshon-thogs
White W(i): Ka-la ro-zan
རྒྱལ་པོ་མཚོན་ཐོགས།
Green E(i) (opportune passageway)
Yellow NE: sTag-gzig sna-dus, Nag-mo khyo-med
White W(ii) (opportune passageway)
Yellow NW: Nad-bdud, gShed-po dur-'debs
Blue N(ii) (opportune passageway)
Blue N(i): Byis-pa rta-bdud
སྟག་གཟིག་ནག་མོ།
བྱིས་པ་ལྟ་བདུད།
ནདབདུདགཤེད་པོ། །
Plate 4, fig. 4 Hare day.
Dragon day ('brug-zhag)
Yellow SE: rGyal-po mtshon-thogs,
Red S(i): Ka-la ro-zan
Red S(ii) (opportune passageway)
Yellow SW:gShed-po dur-'debs
ལོ་མཚོན་ཐོཊ་སླེ་བརྟེན། | མལ་རི་ཟབ
ག་འདར་འདེབས།
Dragon day ('brug-zhag)
sMe-ba bla-mkhyen
Green E(ii) (opportune passageway)
Green E(i): gshin-rje zas-'brog, Nag-mo khyo-med
Yellow NE: Nad-bdud
གཤིན་རྗེ། ཆག་མེ། |:
White W(i) (opportune passageway)
White W(ii) (opportune passageway)
Yellow NW: sTag-gzig sna-dus
Blue N(ii): Byis-pa rta-bdud
Blue Ni) (opportune passageway)
རྣཛའདུད།
ས་པ་རྟབདུད།
སྟག་གཟིག།
Plate 4, fig. 4 Dragon day.



134
The White Beryl
，
གཞིན་ཤོ་
རྒྱལ་བོ་མཚོན་ཐོགས་
སྙན་གག།
Snake day (sbrul-zhag)
Yellow SE: gShed-po dur-'debs
Green E(i): Nag-mo khy0-med
Red S(i): rGyal-po mtshon-thogs
Red S(ii) (opportune passageway)
Snake day (sbrul-zhag)
Yellow SW: STag-gzig sna-dus
White W(i) (opportune passageway)
White W(ii) (opportune passageway)
Yellow NW (opportune passageway)
ནག་
ཀ་ལ་རེ་ཟན།
བློ་བ་སྨིན་བྱིས་པ།རྟབདུད།
ཤར་བདུད་
Green E(i): Ka-la ro-zan
Yellow NE: sMe-ba bla-mkhyen,
Blue N(ii) (opportune passageway)
Blue N(i): gShin-rje zas-'brog
Byis-pa rta-bdud, Nad-bdud
Plate 4, fig. 4Snake day.
།
1:|:
Red S(i) (opportune passageway)
Red S(ii): rGyal-po mtshon-thogs
སྟག་གཟིག་ལྷག་ཡོད་
Horse day (rta-zhag)
Yellow SE: sTag-gzig sna-dus, Nag-mo khyo-med
Green E(ii) (opportune passageway)
Green E(i): Byis-pa rta-bdud
Yellow SW (opportune passageway)
White W(i): gShin-rje zas-'brog
Horse day (rta-zhag)
White W(ii) (opportune passageway)
Yellow NW: sMe-ba bla-mkhyen
Yellow NE: Nad-bdud, gShed-po dur-'debs
Blue N(ii) (opportune passageway)
Blue N(i): Ka-la ro-zan
བྱིས་པ་རྟ་བདུད།
ནད་བརུང་གཤེངཔེ།
།：:|:ཀ་ལཊི་བན། :
སུ་བ།བླུམཁྱེན།
Plate 4, fig. 4 Horse day.
Plate 5, fig. 4 (Mst: ff. 20-24): Geomantic obstacles and opportune passageways associated with the days (zhag-gi sa-bdag 'gag-'gro lam), continued
Sheep day (lug-zhag)
YellowSE:Nad-bdud
Red S(i): gShin-rje zas-'brog, Nag-mo khyo-med
Red S(ii) (opportune passageway)
Yellow SW: rGyal-po mtshon-thogs,
ནད་བདུད།
ག-ཤིན་ནག་སོ།
།
sMe-ba bla-mkhyen
ཀལ་པོ་ཟ:
Sheep day (lug-zhag)
White Wi): Ka-la ro-zan
ས་
Green E(ii): Byis-pa rta-bdud
Green E(i) (opportune passageway)
Yellow NE: STag-gzig sna-dus
White W(ii) (opportune passageway)
།
DII
Blue N(ii) (opportune passageway)
Blue N(1) opportune passageway)
Yellow NW: gShed-po dur-'debs
，
གཤིང་ལ།
E
།
Plate 5, fig. 4 Sheep day.
Monkey day (spre-zhag)
Yellow SE: sMe-ba bla-mkhyen,
Red S(i): Ka-la ro-zan
Red S(ii): Nag-mo
Yellow SW: gShed-po dur-'debs
སྨེ་བ་ཤ་ཀྱིས་གཏརུང་ གལ་སྲོ་ན།
ནག་སྟེ།
Byis-pa rta-bdud, Nad-bdud
།
རྒྱལ་པོ་མཚོན་ཐོགས།
།
པ
Green E(ii) (opportune passageway)
་་
་
Monkey day (spre-zhag)
་་
Green E(i): gShin-rje zas-'brog
Yellow NE (opportune passageway)
White W(i): rGyal-po mtshon-thogs
White W(ii) (opportune passageway)
Yellow NW: sTag-gzig sna-dus
Blue N(ii) (opportune passageway)
Blue N(i) (opportune passageway)
སྟག་གཟིག་
Plate 5, fig. 4 Monkey day.
Bird day (bya-zhag)
Red S(i): Byis-pa rta-bdud
Yellow SW: STag-gzig sna-dus, Nag-mo khyo-med
ནད་འདང་གཤང་བོ།
སྟག་གཟིག།ནག་མོ།
བྱིས་པ་རྟ་བདུད།
Yellow SE: Nad-bdud, gShed-po dur-'debs
Green E(ii) (opportune passageway)
Green E(): Ka-la ro-zan
Red S(ii) (opportune passageway)
Bird day (bya-zhag)
White W(i) (opportune passageway)
White Wii): rGyal-po mtshon-thogs
Yellow NW (opportune passageway)
ཀ༩ལོ་བར་
རྒྱལ་པོ་མཚོན་ཐོགས།
Yellow NE: sMe-ba bla-mkhyen
Blue N(ii) (opportune passageway)
Blue Ni): gShin-rje zas-'brog
བ་བྦམཁྱེན།
གཤིན་རྗེ།
Plate 5, fig. 4 Bird day.
Dog day (khyi-zhag)
པ
པ
བྱ
Yellow SE: STag-gzig sna-dus
Red S(i) (opportune passageway)
Red S(ii): Byis-pa rta-bdud
Yellow SW: Nad-bdud
L
།
སྟག་གཟིག།
Dog day (khyi-zhag)
，
་་
།
་་་་་
་་་་
IF ན་
ན་དག་
ན་
ནད་བདུད། །
གཤིནཎྜིནག་མོ།
ཟླ 1
ནས་༡༢
བར་
ན་་་་་
མ
Green E(ii) (opportune passageway)
Green E(I) (opportune passageway)
Yellow NE: gShed-po dur-'debs
་
་་་་་་
་་་
White W(i): gShin-rje zas-'brog, Nag-mo khyo-med
White W(i) opportune passageway)
Yellow NW: rGyal-po mtshon-thogs, sMe-ba bla-mkhyen
།
ན་པ་ཞིག་
མ་
།
བྱ་
།
ང
ན
་
ལ
་་་
Blue N(ii) (opportune passageway)
Blue N(i): Ka-la ro-zan
，
D
གཤེ་བ་
རྒྱལ་པོ་མཚོན་ཐོགས་སྨེ་
Plate 5, fig. 4 Dog day.
Pig day (phag-zhag)
Yellow SE (opportune passageway)
་
Red S(i): gShin-rje zas-'brog
Red S(ii) (opportune passageway)
YellowSW: sMe-ba bla-mkhyen,
སག་སྨིན་གྱིས་པར་བདུད།
ནང་བདུད9PM
Byis-pa rta-bdud, Nad-bdud
Pig day (phag-zhag)
White W(i): Ka-la ro-zan
ན་ལང་འད།
ནག་མ།
ག ང་པ་དུང་འརེབས།
Green E(ii) (opportune passageway)
Green E(1) (opportune passageway)
Yellow NE:slag-gzig sna-dus
White W(ii): Nag-mo khyo-med
Blue N(ii) (opportune passageway)
Blue N(): rGyal-po mtshon-thogs
Yellow NW: gShed-po dur-'debs
སག་གཊྛིག།
རྒྱལ་པོ་རྣམ་
Plate 5, fig. 4 Pig day.



135
Geomantic aspects of the years, months, days and hours
Spirit lords of the hours (White Beryl, ff. 477–478a)
Among the thirty-seven spirit lords of the hours, there is a group of fifteen which are particularly inauspicious. These comprise: gYu-
mdzod sngon-mo dus-kyi lha, Dus-tshod bla-mkhyen, Sa-bdag 'jab-rtsegs, mTsho-sngon and the sub-group known as Dus-tshod sa-
rgyal bdun-gyi bzhi-gshed. Other spirit lords having an impact on the hours have already been mentioned, such as the ‘male and female
celestial dogs' (gnam-khyi nag-pho-mo), the minor spirits Se-bdud and 'Gog-ku, the ‘twelve hidden spirit lords' (gab-pa'i lha bcu-gnyis) and
Sa'i 'phung-byed, who is one of the spirit lords of further insistence (yang-'khol).
The calculation of the black hours (dus-tshod nag-po rtsis) resembles that of the days and hours. For example, on a
mouse or horse day, the hours of the bird and hare are black.
gYu-mdzod sngon-mo dus-kyi Iha
Plate 6, fig. 4 (Ms I: ff. 25–30): Geomantic obstacles and opportune passageways associated with the hours (dus-kyi sa-bdag 'gag-'gro lam)
Tiger hour (stag-dus)
Yellow SE: Nad-bdud
Red Sci): Thab-Iha se-shar,
Red S(iii) (opportune passageway)
Yellow SW: sNang-sel khrab-gyon 10
A'DA A959
བྷས་ལྟ་བུས་འདར་
Red S(i): hidden spirit Ba-dan, Se-bdud
(between morning and noon)
Bus-pa rta-bdud
སྣང་སེལ། །
གgའ་ཤོག།
S'
TE
TESNAK
logo
འགོག་ཀྱུགཞེས་བུ་ཁྲི་དྲུག །
སྟག་རོཟན་ནག་མོ་གཤིན་|
Agar TS4311
White W(i): gZa'-thog
White W(ii): sMe-ba bla-mkhyen
995
མག་གཟིག།
Green E(iii) (opportune passageway)
Green E(ii): 'Gog-ku, gCer-bu lag-rdum,
gNyan khra drug, sTag-gzig, Ka-la ro-zan,
Nag-mo khyo-med, gShin-je zas-'brog
Green E(): gNyan-khra, 'Grams-phye,
Ku-gu, Bya byung-ka
Yellow NE: Dur-len, gShan-pa =
gShed-po dur-'debs
Tiger hour (stag-dus)
Centre: Tshes-gnyan ro-dgu at twilight on the 8th day (ro-dgu brgyad-la srod)
Centre: Klu-gza' nag-mo on the 15th day (klu-gza' bco-Inga)
White W(iii) (opportune passageway)
Plate 6, fig. 4 Tiger hour.
Blue N(iii) (opportune passageway)
Blue N(ii): rGyal-po mtshon-thogs
Blue N(i): hidden spirit Bya-khyung
Yellow NW: STag-gzig sna-dus
Hare hour (yos-dus)
Yellow SE: sNang-sel khrab-gyon,
Red S(i) (opportune passageway)
Red S(iii) (opportune passageway)
Yellow SW: Thab-Iha se-shar
སྙཛཐིལ།སུ་ལེན། །
Red S(ii): Se-bdud in the afternoon,
Ka-la ro-zan, Bus-pa rta-bdud, Nad-bdud
ན
བསལ།
ས་བརྟནདལ་
Dur-len, gShed-po dur-'debs
White W(i): hidden spirit Ba-dan
འགོས་ལg@ཀུ་རུས་སྦལ། |རོ་དགུ་སྦྱོརg
is the serie a-31
pos
[ གཟཐོག།བྱ་ཁྱུང༌།
ནག་མོ་རྒྱལ་པོ་སྟགཟིག།
Green Eciii): 'Grams-phye, Ku-gu,
hidden spirit Rus-sbal ser-po
Green E(ii): gShin-gyi pho-rog,
'Gog-ku, gCer-bu lag-rdum,
White W(ii) (opportune passageway)
Hare hour (yos-dus)
Centre: Tshe-gnyan ro-dgu at midnight on the 18th day (ro-dgu bco-brgyad nam-phyed)
Centre: Klu-gza' nag-mo on the 18th or 12th day (klu-gza' bco-brgyad, bco-gnyis)
Plate 6, fig. 4 Hare hour.
gNyan khra-drug stag, gShin-je
zas-'brog, sMe-ba bla-mkhyen
Green E(i) (opportune passageway)
White W(iii): gZa'-thog, hidden spirit
Bya-khyung
Yellow NW: Nag-mo khyo-med,
rGyal-po mtshon-thogs, sTag-gzig sna-dus
Yellow NE (opportune passageway)
Blue N(iii) (opportune passageway)
Blue N(ii) (opportune passageway)
Blue N(i): gNyan-khra
ALCALDRIAN
Red S() (opportune passageway)
Red S(i): Bus-pa rta-bdud
Red S(iii): hidden spirit Bya-khyung
Yellow SW: Se-bdud from noon until late
བ
ཤུ ས་བདུད།
བྱ་ཁྱུངས་བདུད་ཀྱི་གསན་
941
TV
4981
afternoon nyi-phyed-nas bri-gso-bar,
gShan-pa=gShed-po dur-'debs
White W(i): gNyan-khra
ཁྲི་དྲུག་གཅེར་བུ་སྟག།གཤིན།
ཝམ་གཏོགས་ཟ1 ཐབ་ལྷའཊྚནནག་མོ།
Dragon hour ('brug-dus)
Yellow SE: Ku-gu, hidden spirit
Ba-dan ser, 'Grams-phye, 'Gog-ku,
Dur-len, Nad-bdud, sTag-gzig sna-dus
Green E(): (opportune passageway)
Green E(ii): gCer-bu lag-rdum,
gNyan khra-drug stag, gShin-je zas-'brog
Green E() (opportune passageway)
Yellow NE: sNang-sel khrab-gyon,
gShan-pa = gShed-po dur-'debs
White W(ii): Thab-Iha se-shar, Ka-la
སྣང་སེལ།
།
པ་ན།
Dragon hour ('brug-dus)
Centre: Tshes-gnyan ro-dgu on the morning of the 28th day (ro-dgu nyer-brgyad nyi-dros)
Centre: Klu-gza' nag-mo throughout the whole month except the 25th day (klu-gza' nyer-Inga ma-gtogs zla-ri)
གཐའ་ཐོག་རྒྱལ་བློན།
ro-zan, Nag-mo khyo-med
Plate 6, fig. 4 Dragon hour.
White W(ii) (opportune passageway)
Yellow NW:gZa'-thog, rGyal-po mtshon-
Blue N(iii) (opportune passageway)
Blue N(ii) (opportune passageway)
Blue N(i): Ba-dan
thogs, sMe-ba bla-mkhyen
Snake hour (sbrul-dus)
Yellow SE: Dur-len
KRANASTASIA19737
ཀུན། ཁྲི་དྲག་ཤུ
ནུཔཱལེན་སྟག་གཟིག།
Yellow SW: Dur-len, Nad-bdud,
sTag-gzig sna-dus
White W(i): Se-bdud at the late afternoon
hour of nyi-myur
Green E(1) (opportune passageway)
Red S(i):gNyan-khra, 'Grams-phye, Red S(ii): 'Gog-ku, bLa-mkhyen, Red S(iii) (opportune passageway)
Ku-gu, hidden spirit Tsang-kun gCer-bu lag-rdum, gNyan khra-drug bya
Snake hour (sbrul-dus)
Centre: Tshes-gnyan ro-dgu on the morning of the 5th day (ro-dgu Inga'i nyi-dros)
Centre: Klu-gza' nag-mo on the 25th day (klu-gza' nyer-Inga)
སེ་བར་ཞི་མྱུར།
རྒྱལ་པོ།
བས བབྱུང་
-
SANH
selet
Green E(ii): Bus-pa rta-bdud
White W(ii): rGyal-po mtshon-thogs
Green E(i): hidden spirit Ba-dan
White W(ii) (opportune passageway)
Yellow NE (opportune passageway)
Blue N(iii) (opportune passageway)
Blue Ni): gZa'-thog
Yellow NW: sNang-sel khrab-gyon,
Plate 6, fig. 4 Snake hour.
Blue N(ii): gShin-gyi pho-rog,
mChe-ba-can, Thab-Iha se-shar,
hidden spirit Bya-khyung,
gShan-pa = gShed-po dur-'debs
Ka-la ro-zan, Nag-mokhyo-med,
gShin-je zas-'brog on the 29th day



136
The White Beryl
Horse hour (rta-dus)
ནད་འདུད།
ལ་དམ་
ཁྲི་དྲུག་འགོག་ཀུན་ག འགྲམ་མ་ཕྱི།
1949
སྣཔསེལ་དུར་ལེན།
Yellow SE: Nad-bdud
Yellow SW: Nang-sel
1
khrab-gyon, Dur-len
Del Vakt
99al
གན་པ། |གཟའ་ཐོག་
White Wi) (opportune passageway)
Red S(i): hidden spirit Ba-dan
Red Sci): 'Gog-ku, gCer-bu lag-rdum, Red S(iii): 'Grams-phye,
gNyan khra-drug, sMe-ba bla-mkhyen Ku-gu, hidden spirit Byi-lam
Horse hour (rta-dus)
Centre: Tshes-gnyan ro-dgu at the twilight of the 15th day (ro-dgu bco-Inga'i srod)
Centre: Klu-gza' nag-mo on the 15th day (klu-gza' bcu-Inga)
སྐྱེ་བདུན་ཉིཡུལ་རྒྱལ་པོ་ལས་བདག་ལ་
བྱ་ཁྱུང༌། ནག་མོ་སྟགཟིས།
Green E(i) (opportune passageway)
Green E(ii): Thab-Iha, Ro-zan, Bus-bdud
a 94.
White Wii): Se-bdud at the hour of
གའི་
|
sunset, rGyal-po mtshon-thogs
Green E(): hidden spirit gNyan-khra
White W(iii) (opportune passageway)
Plate 6, fig. 4 Horse hour.
Yellow NE: gShan-pa =gShed-po
Blue N(iii): gZa'-thog
Blue N(ii): gShin-je zas-'brog
Blue N(): hidden spirit Bya-khyung
Yellow NW: Nag-mo khyo-med,
sTag-gzig sna-dus
dur-'debs
Sheep hour (lug-dus)
Yellow SE SNang-sel khrab-gyon,
gShan-pa = gShed-po dur-'debs
Red S(i) (opportune passageway)
Red S(iii) (opportune passageway)
སྦཔསེལ།བཀཞས།
A'5419|713191
རྡོ་ཟནgམན།
TEEMA-MER
Red S(ii): gNyan khra-drug bya,
gCer-bu lag-rdum, Ka-la ro-zan,
sMe-ba bla-mkhyen
Yellow SW: Ku-gu, 'Gog-ku, Dur-len,
rGyal-po mtshon-thogs, 'Grams-'phye
1
དུར་འཛིན།
ཐབ་ལྷནག་ནས་ཐདུང་།
Green E(i): Dur-len
White W(i): hidden spirit Ba-dan
Green E(ii): Bus-pa rta-bdud
Sheep hour (lug-dus)
Centre: Tshes-gnyan ro-dgu, in the late afternoon of the 25th day (nyer-Inga'i myur-smad)
Centre: Klu-gza' nag-mo on the 11th day (klu-gza' bcu-gcig)
White W(ii): Thab-lha se-shar,
ན་རྗེ། གཉིས་མིན
Nag-mo khyo-med, Nad-bdud
White Wiii): hidden spirit Bya-khyung
Plate 6, fig. 4 Sheep hour.
Green E(i) (opportune passageway)
Yellow NE: gZa' -thog, hidden spirit
Tsang-kun", sTag-gzig sna-dus
Blue N(iii) (opportune passageway)
Blue N(): hidden spirit gNyan-khra,
Yellow NW: Se-bdud at twilight
Blue N(ii): gShin-gyi pho-rog,
gShin-je zas-'brog on the 19th
Dur-len
Plate 7, fig. 4 (Ms l: ff. 31-34): Geomantic obstacles and opportune passageways associated with the hours (dus-kyi sa-bdag 'gag-'gro lam), continued
ST
Monkey hour (spre-dus)
Yellow SE: STag-gzig sna-dus
ETIA
BENCE
Red S(i) (opportune passageway)
Red S(ii): rGyal-po mtshon-thogs
Red S(iii): hidden spirit Bya-khyung
A
ES
ES
1རྒྱལ་པོ། །བྱ་ཁྱུང༌། རལེན།ཁན་ས
© G eology 1990nmaya na
Albineta
en toparlakat
Green E(iii) (opportune passage-way)
གཐའ་ཐོག།
gedral
Yellow SW Dur-len, gShan-pa =
gShed-po dur-'debs
White W(i): gNyan-khra, 'Grams-phye,
Ku-gu, gZig-mjug
White W(ii): 'Gog-ku, gCer-bu lag-rdum,
gNyan khra-drug sbrul, Ka-la ro-zan,
Nag-mo khyo-med, gShin-gyi pho-rog
White Wii) (opportune passageway)
Monkey hour (spre-dus)
Centre: Tshes-gnyan ro-dgu at dawn on the 1st day (ro-dgu gcig-gi tho-rengs)
Centre: Klu-gza' nag-mo on the 15th and 16th days (klu-gza' bcu-Inga, bcu-drug)
Green E(ii) (opportune passage-way)
ཐབ་ལྷ།
Plate 7, fig. 4 Monkey hour.
Green E(): gZa'-thog
Yellow NE: sNang-sel khrab-gyon
Blue N(ii) (opportune passageway)
Blue N(i): hidden spirit Ba-dan
Yellow NW: Thab-lha se-shar
Blue N(ii): Se-bdud at midnight,
Bus-pa rta-bdud, Nad-bdud,
sMe-ba bla-mkhyen, gShin-je zas-'brog
Bird hour (bya-dus)
Yellow SE (opportune passageway)
Red S(i): gNyan-khra
Red S(ii): rGyal-po mtshon-thogs
Red S(iii): (opportune passageway)
Yellow SW: Nag-mo khyo-med,
གཉན་རྒྱལ་པོ།།
ཞག་མོ་མཉགཟིག།
bLa-mkhyen, sTag-gzig
-
Green E(ii): gZa'-thog
White W(i) (opportune passageway)
18
གཟའཐོབ།
ནད་འདུ།
Suomen
HESTAI
TER
-
ERAS
Green E(ii): Nad-bdud
Bird hour (bya-dus)
21
གླུ་གཟའ་རུ་
ngwagKLi5:13
Centre: Tshes-gnyan ro-dgu on the morning of the 11th day (ro-dgu bcu-gcig nyi-dros)
Token'
23
261-413
Green E(i): hidden spirit Ba-dan
Centre: Klu-gza' nag-mo on the 6th day (klu-gza' drug)
32
White W(ii): 'Gog-ku, gCer-bu lag-rdum,
gNyan khra-drug sbrul, gShin-je zas-'brog
White W(iii): 'Grams-phye, Ku-gu,
Thab-Iha se-shar, hidden spirit He-thon
Yellow NW: sNang-sel khrab-gyon,
hidden spirit Bya-khyung, Dur-len,
gShan-pa = gShed-po dur-'debs
Plate 7, fig. 4 Bird hour.
Yellow NE (opportune passageway)
Blue N(iii) (opportune passageway)
Blue N(ii): mChe-ba-can,
Blue N() (opportune passageway)
Se-bdud at midnight, Ka-la ro-zan,
Bus-pa rta-bdud on the 6th and 16th days
Dog hour (khyi-dus)
Yellow SE: Za'-thog
Red S(i): hidden spirit Ba-dan
Red S(ii): Nag-mo khyo-med,
Red S(iii) (opportune passageway)
Yellow SW: sNang-sel khrab-gyon,
49113
Nad-bdud
rGyal-po mtshon-thogs,
sMe-ba bla-mkhyen
FE
Aa8703
བདུག་ལག84ཐུ
White W(i) (opportune passageway)
पालका
Green E(ii) (opportune passage-way)
Green E(ii): Ka-la ro-zan
Dog hour (khyi-dus)
White W(ii): gShin-gyi pho-rog,
24''
net
Centre: Tshes-gnyan ro-dgu at twilight on the 21st day (ro-dgu nyer-gcig srod)
Centre: Klu-gza' nag-mo on the 14th, 15th and 27th days (klu-gza' bcu-bzhi, bcu-Inga, nyer-bdun-pa)
Plate 7, fig. 4 Dog hour.
Green E(): gNyan-khra
gCer-bu lag-rdum, gNyan khra-drug sbrul,
gShin-je zas-'brog
White W(iii) (opportune passageway)
Yellow NW: Ku-gu, 'Grams-phye, Byi-dur,
"Gog-ku, Dur-len, sTag-gzig sna-dus,
Bus-pa rta-bdud
Yellow NE: Se-bdud at dawn,
Blue N(iii) (opportune passageway)
Blue N(ii): Thab-Iha se-shar
Blue N(i): hidden spirit Bya-khyung
gShan-pa = gShed-po dur-'debs



137
Geomantic aspects of the years, months, days and hours
Red S(i): gZa'-thog
Pig hour (phag-dus)
Yellow SE: sNang-sel khrab-gyon,
gShan-pa = gShed-po dur-'debs
སྙཔསོལ་འཉནས་ Taggal
Hadiaat
karapagaray Way
ཡེ་བདུདན་ལངས་ནས་ཀི་ཤར་ས་རྒྱལ
29987
Yellow SW: Nad-bdud
ནད་བདུད།
བ་མ་
བུས་འདུད། གཤིན་རྗེ་
Red S(ii): gShin-gyi pho-rog,
Red S(iii) (opportune passageway)
Thab-Iha se-shar, Ka-la ro-zan,
Nag-mo khyo-med, sMe-ba bla-mkhyen
Pig hour (phag-dus)
Centre: Tshes-gnyan ro-dgu after midnight on the 9th day (ro-dgu dgu'inam-phyed yoh
Centre: Klu-gza' nag-mo on the 6th day (klu-gza' drug)
SO9351
White W(i): hidden spirit Ba-dan
44E
'SA1944 KAATO Sala
Green E(iii) (opportune passage-way)
Green E(ii): Se-bdud from daybreak
until sunrise, rGyal-po mtshon-thogs
White W(ii): Bus-pa rta-bdud,
gShin-je zas-'brog
White W(ii): hidden spirit Bya-khyung
Plate 7, fig. 4 Pig hour.
Green E(1) (opportune passageway)
Yellow NE: STag-gzig sna-dus
Blue N(iii) (opportune passageway)
Blue N(ii): 'Gog-ku, gCer-bu lag-rdum,
Blue N(i): gNyan-khra, 'Grams-phye,
Yellow NW: Dur-len
gNyan khra-drug sbrul
Ku-gu, hidden spirit Phyug-po
Plate 8, fig. 4 (Ms l: ff. 35-36): Geomantic obstacles and opportune passageways associated with the hours (dus-kyi sa-bdag 'gag-'gro lam), continued
Mouse hour (byi-dus)
Yellow SE: Nag-mo khyo-med,
Red S(i) (opportune passageway)
Red S(ii): gShin-je zas-'brog
Yellow SW (opportune passageway)
བག་གོསྤྱགཎྜིག།
Red S(iii): hidden spirit Bya-khyung,
gZa'-thog
Plesna299
@asa
041aaqo gor
སུ་ཀྱིས་བཛཞུས་འདུ།
གི་རྟོབསsཁ།
l'autre
ནད་བདུད། །
STag-gzig sna-dus
Green E(iii) (opportune passageway)
Green E(ii): rGyal-po mtshon-thogs
White W(i): gNyan-khra
Lato
Mouse hour (byi-dus)
Centre: Tshes-gnyan ro-dgu at midnight of the 19th day (ro-dgu bcu-dgu nam-phyed)
Centre: Klu-gza' nag-mo on the 6th day (klu-gza' drug), and Thab-lha se-shar on the stairs and passageway
19019119
White W(ii): Se-bdud from sunrise to
morning, Bus-pa rta-bdud, gShan-pa =
gShed-po dur-'debs, Ka-la ro-zan
White Wiii) (opportune passage-way)
Plate 8, fig. 4 Mouse hour.
Green E(i) (opportune passageway)
(thab-Iha skas-gdang srad-kha)
Yellow NE: sNang-sel, Dur-len,
Blue N(i): hidden spirit Ba-dan
Yellow NW: Nad-bdud
Blue N(iii): Ku-gu, 'Grams-phye,
gNyan-Ijang
Blue Ni): 'Gog-ku, gCer-bu lag-rdum,
gNyan khra-drug sbrul
SMe-ba bla-mkhyen
Ox hour (glang-dus)
Yellow SE (opportune passageway)
Yellow SW:gZa'-thog, sTag-gzig sna-dus
གཞན་སྐྱེ་བར་ཀྲིས།བློན། །
གཏྤལ་ཐོག་སྟག་
ཤིག།
White W(i) (opportune passage-way)
Red S(): gNyan-khra
Red Sii): Se-bdud at the morning hour, Red S(iii) (opportune passageway)
sMe-ba bla-mkhyen, gShin-je zas-'brog
0x hour (glang-dus)
Centre: Tshes-gnyan ro-dgu at dawn of the 29th day (ro-dgu nyer-dgu'i tho-rengs)
Centre: Thab-Iha se-shar below the stove (thab-Iha thab-'og); and Klu-gza' nag-mo being impossible
to avert by ritual means (klu-gza' bzlog-med)
ནམ་མོ།
Green E(iii) (opportune passageway)
Green E(ii): Nag-mo khyo-med
ཞིག་
ཀུམཟའ་ ཀྱི་
passare
བགན་བབུས་འདུད་
White W(ii): gShan-pa=
au
gShed-po dur-'debs, Bus-pa rta-bdud
Ver
སྔརསེལ།བྱ་ཁྱུང་།
Sienna
White W(iii) (opportune passageway)
Green E(i): hidden spirit Ba-dan
Yellow NE: 'Grams-phye, 'Gog-ku,
Ku-gu, Dur-len, gNyan-Ijang,
Blue N(ii) (opportune passageway)
Blue N(ii): mChe-ba-can,
Blue Ni) (opportune passageway)
Yellow NW: sNang-sel khrab-gyon,
Plate 8, fig. 4 Ox hour.
gCer-bulag-rdum, gNyan
hidden spirit Bya-khyung
rGyal-po mtshon-thogs, Nad-bdud
khra-drug sbrul, Ka-la ro-zan
Opportune passageways
In the context of our manuscript paintings, the opportune passageways of the years are indicated by the relative locations of King The-se
and his royal family, along with those of the twelve ‘hidden' spirits (gab-pa'i lha bcu-gnyis). Those of the days are indicated by the relative
positions of the Nag-po dgu-skor; and those of the hours by the central positions of Tshes-gnyan ro-dgu and Klu-gza' nag-mo, and the
peripheral positions of the Nag-po dgu-skor, the Gab-pa bcu-gnyis, and Sil-ma'i sa-bdag.
By contrast, there are no open passageways indicated in the charts for the months. Instead, opportune months are
marked by double positive circles and inopportune ones by double negative crosses. These charts of the months are more complicated,
being based on the computational movement of the twelve zodiacal signs as well as the subterranean serpent-bellied spirit (1To'-phye) and
the conjunction of his body parts with various other spirit lords of the soil, including the fifty inauspicious ones (ngan-phyogs lnga-bcu),
the group of six known as ‘dark yellow celestial lines’ (gnam-thig ser-nag drug) and the ‘six black spirits of shade' (sribs-kyi nag-drug). In
addition, there are two distinct overlapping series of spirit lords, one with their names inscribed in black and another in red (indicated
here in different colour type).



IV
Divinations of natal horoscope



ઈત કામ
ર" કરી શકાય
હકીકત
છે
કે



140
The White Beryl
22
re
PA
ENE
ESE
The important topics of natal horoscope and divination concerning marriage are depicted on the twenty-four successive folios of the
illuminated manuscript that constitute Plates 3–8.' In actual fact these form one continuous wall chart, but for the purposes of the pres-
ent publication they have been carefully divided into discrete sections. In addition, the reader should note that the two uppermost
cartouches depicting the lineage, along with the various aspects of the sexagenary cycle and its geomantic aspects, run across the full set
of twenty-four folios. These have already been described above: the lineage in Part 1, the sexagenary year cycle in Part II and the geoman-
tic aspects in Part 11.
The various auspicious and inauspicious modes of human birth are not covert to the experts of divination.
Though the results of past actions which determine these rebirths may be partially seen once negativity has been abandoned, it is
through divination that the diverse joys and sorrows to be experienced by all beings in their present lives may be clearly discerned.
There are several methods of calculating the divinatory pebbles in this type of natal horoscope. However, the reli-
able ‘fixed system' (nam-zhag gtan-gyi mtha'-rtsis) of Mar-ston, which focuses on the divinatory prognosis of a single lifetime, accords
with the method expounded in the Precious Clarifying Lamp (Rin-chen gsal-sgron) and reiterated by Sangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho in White
Beryl (ff. 161bff) and by Lo-chen Dharmaśrī in Moonbeams (ff. 200–23a).
The deployment of divinatory pebbles in
the fixed system of natal horoscope
In Mar-ston's fixed system of natal horoscope, 136 pebbles are generally used. These comprise: four precious pebbles (gces-pa'i rdel bzhi),
one special pebble (sgos-rdel gcig), two indispensable pebbles (med-du mi-rung rde'u gnyis), five pebbles indicative of unchanging luck (mi-
'gyur klung-gi rde'u lnga), one hundred pebbles indicative of the hundred demons (brgya-'dre'i rde'u brgya-phrag gcig), and twenty-four
pebbles of conclusive analysis (stangs-gcod rde'u nyi-shu bzhı). "A clean felt mat should be employed for placement of the pebbles, and they
should be deployed with an undistracted mind.
Among these, the four precious pebbles symbolise the year, month, day and hour of the subject's birth, which are
respectively likened to a king, a minister, a soldier and a weapon. White pebbles should be used if the subject is male, and black ones if the
subject is female. More specifically, the ‘king' pebble, indicating the vitality element of the natal year, is contrasted with the subject's
vitality element; the ‘minister' pebble, indicating the body element of the natal month, is contrasted with the subject's body element; the
'soldier' pebble, indicative of the destiny element of the natal day, is contrasted with the subject's destiny element; and the 'weapon' peb-
ble, indicative of the luck aspect of the natal hour, is contrasted with the subject's luck element. The schematic charts (4.1-4.8) indicate
how all these pebbles are nowadays substituted by positive (white) noughts and negative (black) crosses. These charts are shown in their
English form; an example of an equivalent Tibetan chart, as employed by the sMan-rtsis-Khang Institute in Lhasa, is shown in the
Introduction, page 20. The resulting tally of the pebbles will indicate a distinctive reading, for which the diviner should refer to the White
Beryl commentary or an annual almanac.?



141
Divinations of natal horoscope
Chart 4.1 presents the contrasts indicated by the four precious pebbles in the case of a model subject born in the iron sheep year.
4.1 Exemplary chart
Four precious pebbles
Basis of contrast
Subject's elemental aspects
Pebble
king pebble of natal year: iron sheep
vitality: earth
minister pebble of natal month: fire sheep
body: water
soldier pebble of natal day: wood bird
destiny: iron
weapon pebble of natal hour: water hare
luck: fire
The special pebble is placed after calculating the subject's constitutional type and year aspect, as illustrated on Plate 1, fig. 4.8 It should be
white if the year is one of greater penalty ('chad-chen) or one forming an enemy-relationship (dgra-lo), and black if the year is one of lesser
penalty ('chad-chung) or one forming a friend-relationship (grogs-lo). However, if it forms an identity- or destiny-relationship (dbang-lo),
three white pebbles should be placed; if it forms a mother-relationship (ma-lo), two white pebbles should be placed; and if it forms a son-
relationship (bu-lo), one black and one white pebble should be placed (chart 4.2).
4.2 Exemplary chart
One special pebble
year of lesser penalty
The two indispensable pebbles should comprise one white pebble placed on the sign indicating the hour of the divination,' and another
that should be white if the subject has vitality and destiny elements forming a kha-yan or khong-nong conjunction, black if they form a
se-zhig or 'dun-khur conjunction, or mottled if they form a kha-ral conjunction.10
Opposite Detail of Plate 16, fig. 6 (see p. 176), showing inauspicious
year-signs of 'widowhood'
4.3 Exemplary chart
Two indispensable pebbles
hour of divination 0
se-zhig relationship X
Below Detail of Plate 16, fig. 6 (see p. 176), showing inauspicious
'orphan' year-signs
SER
ASCO
2
RE
SEN



142
The White Beryl
The five pebbles indicative of unchanging luck” comprise: one white pebble indicative of the father's luck aspect, which is placed on the
father's log-men if the subject is a boy,'2 or one white pebble placed on the year-sign of the mother's present age if the subject is a girl;
three black pebbles indicative of the mother's luck aspect which are placed respectively on the mother's log-men, trigram and numeric
square; and one white pebble indicative of the subject's own luck aspect which is placed on the subject's own natal month.13
4.4 Exemplary chart
Five pebbles indicative of unchanging luck (subject is male, born in the earth snake year)
Vitality Body Destiny Luck
Father's log-men
iron tiger wood wood iron iron
Mother's log-men
earth monkey iron earth earth wood
Mother's current trigram
Khon
water
water
water
water
Mother's current numeric square
Black 2
water
water
water
water
Natal month
iron ox
earth
earth
iron
water
As for the pebbles indicative of the hundred demons: the vitality, body, destiny and luck elements of the subject are each subdivided
according to their identity-, mother-, son-, friend- and enemy-relationships, and these are then contrasted ('thabs) with the previously
positioned pebbles indicative of unchanging luck, forming one hundred distinct relationships. 14 If a mother-or friend-relationship is sug-
gested, a white pebble should be placed; if an enemy-or son-relationship is suggested, a black pebble should be placed; if an identity-rela-
tionship of earth or water is suggested, the pebbles should be white; and if an identity-relationship of wood, fire or iron is suggested, they
should be black.15 The reading will be auspicious if the pebbles representing the contrast between the identity-, mother-, son- and friend-
relationships and the corresponding pebbles of unchanging luck are white, and also if all the four pebbles representing the contrast
between the enemy-relationship and the pebbles of unchanging luck are black.16 However, if the subject is a girl, the friend- and enemy-
relationships of the body element are reversed.
The twenty-four pebbles of conclusive analysis are placed once the aforementioned hundred pebbles have been
tallied, column by column, into white and black piles. Specifically, twenty pebbles are placed in the final row below these, with white peb-
bles marking columns of predominantly auspicious pebbles and black ones those of predominantly inauspicious pebbles.
4.5 Exemplary chart
Pebbles indicative of the
hundred demons
fire
Iron
Father's log-men
Twenty-five pebbles indicating relationships between Twenty-five pebbles indicating relationships between Twenty-five pebbles indicating relationships between Twenty-five pebbles indicating relationships between
the subject's vitality element and the pebbles of
the subject's body element and the pebbles of
the subject's destiny element and the pebbles of
the subject's luck element and the pebbles of
unchanging luck
unchanging luck
unchanging luck
unchanging luck
identity mother son friend enemy ' identity mother son friend enemy identity mother son friend enemy identity mother son friend enemy
fire wood earth iron water wood water fire earth iron earth fire iron water wood water iron wood. fire earth
о х х о х х х ох ох ох ох ох хох
0 X X X o o X X o o o xo xo xo xo x
- X
o
o X
0
0 0 X 0 X 0 X
0 0 0 X 0 X 0
X
o X o o o X
X
X
0 0 0 X 0 X 0
X
o o o x
o x X
o o X o
0 X 0 X 0 X 0
0 0
o x x O XO X х ох ох ох х
Mother's log-men
Mother's current trigram
Mother's current numeric square 1
Subject's natal month -
20 pebbles of conclusive analysis
Four additional pebbles should then be placed below the special pebble to represent the respective contrasts between the year, month,
day and hour and the subject's vitality, body, destiny and luck elements in terms of the twelve sectors of growth and decline (dar-gud bcu-
gnyis). "7 If the six auspicious sectors of growth predominate, white ones should be placed, and if the six inauspicious sectors of decline pre-
dominate, black ones should be placed.
4.6 Exemplary chart
Four pebbles representing sectors of growth and decline
Subject's four aspects
Current sign
Predicted sector
Pebbles
vitality: earth
year: sheep
'Comfort' (bde-idan): embryo
'comfort' (bde-idan): embryo
body: earth
month: sheep
destiny: iron
day: bird
00
'finding the great treasure' (gter-chen rnyed): growth
'wish-fulfilment' (bsam-grub): ablution
luck: fire
hour: hare
00
Finally, the aforementioned pebbles indicative of the hundred demons are rearranged into five groups of twenty, corresponding to the
categories of identity-, mother-, son-, friend- and enemy-relationships, and repositioned in the row below the pebbles of conclusive
analysis. Those marking identity-relationships refer to the first part of the subject's life, those marking mother-, son-and friend-relation-
ships to the mid-part, and those marking enemy-relationships to the final part.



143
Divinations of natal horoscope
4.7 Exemplary chart
Rearranged pebbles indicative of the hundred demons
Early life
Later life
Twenty pebbles indicating
Twenty pebbles indicating
х
identity-relationships
0 х х
0 0 0
X o o
X 0 0
X 0 X
Twenty pebbles indicating
mother-relationships
х х о
X X X
o o x
0 0 X
O O O
о
X
o
0
0
0
X
Mid-life
Twenty pebbles indicating
son-relationships
x ox x
X X 0 X
o x x o
X X 0
X X 0
friend-relationships
0 X
X 0
x o
X 0
0 0
Twenty pebbles indicating
enemy-relationships
хох х
0 0 0 X
o X o o
0 X 0 0
X 0 X 0
0
0
X
X
X
x
X
X
0
0
O
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī provides the following account of the placement of the pebbles in natal horoscope (Moonbeams, ff. 20a-22a):
As for the five pebbles indicative of unchanging luck:
In the fixed system of divination (concerning natal horoscope),
One hundred and thirty-six pebbles are utilised altogether.
One white pebble indicative of the father's luck aspect
In this way, each of the vitality, body, destiny and luck aspects
Has twenty-five pebbles, making one hundred pebbles altogether.
It will be auspicious if those symbolising the identity-, mother-, son- and friend-relationships
These comprise: four precious pebbles, one special pebble,
Should be placed in the sector of the father's log-men,
Two indispensable pebbles, five pebbles indicative of unchanging luck,
And three black pebbles indicative of the mother's luck aspect
Of (the subject's] vitality, body, destiny and luck aspects are white;
One hundred pebbles indicative of the hundred demons,
Should be placed (respectively) on the sectors
And it will be auspicious if all four pebbles symbolising the enemy-relationship are black.
of the mother's log-men, trigram and numeric square.
If the subject is female, the friend- and enemy-relationships
And twenty-four pebbles of conclusive analysis.
These pebbles should be placed with an undistracted mind
[Lastly], two white pebbles indicative of the subject's own luck aspect
of the body element are reversed.
Upon a clean felt mat.
Should be placed on the sector of his or her own natal month.
If the subject is a girl, the father's luck aspect should be discarded,
Once these have been ascertained,
And instead one black pebble cast on the sector obtained
There follows (the placement of the twenty-four pebbles of conclusive analysis:
At first, the four precious pebbles (should be placed]:
These [symbolise) the year, month, day and hour of the subject's birth,
By counting forwards from the mother's [birth) year to her present age,
Now, those pebbles indicative of the hundred demons
Which are respectively likened to a king, a minister, a soldier and a weapon.
So that there are four pebbles indicative of the mother's luck-aspect.
Should be counted (column by column),
White pebbles should be cast if the subject is male,
Separately into white and black piles.
And black ones if the subject is female.
These comprise the five pebbles indicative of unchanging luck,
And with them, the series of twelve basic pebbles 18 is completed.
Twenty pebbles should then be placed (in the row) below them,
White ones marking (columns of predominantly) auspicious pebbles,
And black ones those [of predominantly) inauspicious pebbles.
The special pebble should be deployed [in various forms]
After computing the subject's] constitutional type and year aspect:
The pebbles indicative of the hundred demons are subdivided as follows:
A white pebble should be placed if the year is one of great penalty,
The subject's four aspects: vitality, body, destiny and luck
In addition, one should calculate the sectors
And a black pebble if it is one of lesser penalty.
Coinciding with the year, month, day and hour
of the successive sectors of growth and decline,
Three white pebbles should be placed
if the year forms an identity or destiny-relationship,
Are each subdivided according to the five types of relationship:
Identity, mother, son, friend and enemy,
[Forming four groups of five sub-columns).
Pebbles are then placed marking the contrast
Associated respectively with the [subject's] vitality, body, destiny and luck,
And then place four pebbles in front of the special pebble:
And two [white ones] if it forms a mother-relationship,
One black and one white if it forms a son-relationship,
Between each item of these five sub-columns,
White ones representing the six auspicious sectors,
And black ones representing the six inauspicious sectors.
One white one if it forms an enemy-relationship,
And one black one if it forms a friend-relationship.
And the aspects symbolised by the aforementioned five) pebbles
Indicative of unchanging luck.
[Specifically, the subject's vitality, body, destiny and luck aspects)
In this way, there are [altogether) twenty-four conclusive calculations.
This (is the method] professed by the learned Mar-ston.
Are contrasted with the respective vitality, body, destiny and luck elements
As for the two indispensable pebbles,
One of them should be white in the case of a subject
Whose vitality and destiny elements form
of the father and mother's log-men,
And the subject's own natal month,
As well as with the (mother's current) trigram and numeric square.
A kha-yan or khong-nong conjunction,
Black in the case of one with a se-zhig or 'dun-khur conjunction,
Now, white pebbles should be placed to indicate mother- and friend-relationships,
Or mottled in the case of one with a kha-ral conjunction.
Black for enemy- and son-relationships,
The other should be white and placed on the sector
White for the ſidentical] contact of earth or water,
indicative of the hour when the calculation is made.
And black for (the identical contact of] wood, iron or fire.
Alternative methods of deploying the
divination pebbles in natal horoscope
According to Khyung-nag there are two alternative methods, known as the Byang-ston Padma tradition and the 'Brog-ston Ral-pa tradi-
tion. The former deploys one hundred pebbles, symbolising the contrasting relationships formed between the identity, mother, son,
friend and enemy subdivisions of the subject's four elemental aspects and the identity, mother, son, friend and enemy subdivisions of the
four elemental aspects of the five luck aspects (klung-lnga). Twenty pebbles of conclusive analysis are then placed, indicating the divina-
tory prognoses (kha-dmar), along with a single additional pebble representing the sectors of growth and decline. In cases of growth, this
pebble is known as “established forward luck' (mdun-tshugs), and in cases of decline as backward void luck' (rgyab-stongs). 19
According to the latter tradition, the four identity-relationships formed by the subject's four elemental aspects
are contrasted respectively with the four identity-relationships formed by the five luck aspects, while the mother-, son-, friend- and
enemy-relationships formed by the subject's four elemental aspects are contrasted with the elements representing the trigram and
numeric square among the five luck aspects; and the subject's destiny element meanwhile is contrasted with the father and mother's log-
men and the subject's natal month. In this way, one hundred pebbles are to be deployed. Once these have been tallied, twenty pebbles of
conclusive analysis are placed, along with one additional pebble to mark the predominance of the sectors of growth or decline.
Also, according to the tradition known as the 'ancient system of Chinese divination' (rgya-rtsis rnying-ma),20 the
mother-, son-, friend- and enemy-relationships formed by the subject's destiny element are contrasted with the vitality element of the
five luck aspects.



144
The White Beryl
Lo-chen Dharmasrī summarises these three alternative traditions as follows (Moonbeams, f. 22a/b):
Khyung nag also respectfully maintains this lineage of ours, 21
When the mother-, son-, friend- and enemy-relationships
The 'Brog-ston Ral-pa tradition:
Secondly, there is the tradition of 'Brog-ston Ral-pa:
Because it is the unmistaken intention of the Root Tantra of the Clarifying Lamp.22
However, he additionally holds that, distinct from that [method],
In this case, a contrast is made between the four identity-relationships
Corresponding to the destiny element
Are contrasted with the vitality element of the five luck aspects
This is said to accord with the 'ancient system of Chinese divination'
There are two different techniques.
formed by the subject's vitality and so forth,
And the four respective identity-relationships formed by the five luck aspects.
The Byang-ston Padma tradition:
Similarly, [the subject's] mother-, son-, friend- and enemy-relationships
The five aspects of unchanging luck are also said to comprise:
According to the Byang-ston Padma tradition,
Are contrasted with the elements of the trigram and numeric square,
The father's luck aspect, the mother's luck trigram,
There are one hundred pebbles symbolising the inner contrast
Included among the five luck aspects,
The mother's trigram, which is indicative of one's own luck,
While the other three [father and mother's log-men and natal month]
The numeric square luck aspect, and natal month luck aspect.
Between the identity-, mother-, son-, friend- and enemy-relationships
Formed by the subject's vitality, body, destiny and luck elements
Are contrasted only with the destiny element.
However, that is a topic to be investigated by scholars.23
And the identity-, mother-, son-, friend- and enemy-relationships
Then, there are twenty [pebbles of conclusive analysis.
Formed by the vitality and so forth of the five luck aspects.
In addition, twenty-five pebbles are placed
Corresponding to the sectors of growth and decline,
There are twenty divinatory prognoses (kha-dmar concerning these,
And in addition a single pebble should be cast
and counted into white and black piles.
After calculating the sectors of growth and decline.
A single pebble is then added to mark whichever pile is larger.
In cases of growth, this pebble is known as 'established forward luck' (mdun-tshugs),
In this way, there are 'twenty-one (pebbles of conclusive analyses'.
And in cases of decline as 'backward void luck' (rgyab-stongs).
These are thus said to be 'twenty-one conclusive analyses'.
The twenty-five crucial pebbles representing
the sectors of growth and decline
All traditions maintain that twenty-five crucial pebbles should be placed to represent the sectors of growth and decline (dar-gud). Now,
the subject's vitality, body, destiny, luck and constitutional type are subdivided according to the identity-, mother-, son-, friend- and
enemy-relationships, and pebbles are placed on the sectors of growth and decline that coincide with these twenty-five permutations.
Those representing the subject's vitality element and constitutional type are placed upon the year sector of the sectors of growth and
decline, those representing the body element upon the month sector, those representing the destiny element upon the day sector, and
those representing the luck element upon the hour sector. The six auspicious sectors of growth are indicated by white pebbles, and the
six inauspicious sectors of decline by black ones. Chart 4.8 exemplifies these pebbles of growth and decline.
4.8 Exemplary chart
Luck
Vitality
Identity
dar-gud
Body
Identity
Destiny
Identity
Mother
Son
Friend
Enemy
Mother
Son
Friend
Enemy
Identity
Mother
Son
Friend
Enemy
Mother
dar-gud
Son
dar-gud
Friend
dar-gud
Enemy
dar-gud
Constitutional type
Identity Mother
dar-gud dar-gud
Son
dar-gud
Friend
dar-gud
Enemy
dar-gud
Year
Month
dar-gud
dar-gud
dar-gud
dar-gud
dar-gud
Hour
dar-gud
dar-gud
dar-gud
dar-gud
dar-gud
Day
dar-gud
dar-gud
dar-gud
dar-gud
dar-gud
Yet another tradition holds that these crucial pebbles number 150, since the aforementioned twenty-five crucial pebbles are further sub-
divided according to the five relationships, making 125 permutations, and in addition twenty-five ‘pebbles of conclusive analyses' are
placed in the final row once these have been tallied.
In the words of Lo-chen Dharmaśrī (Moonbeams, f. 225–23a):
Then, according to all (traditions),
There is also another tradition, which evolved therefrom,
There are said to be twenty-five crucial pebbles,
Representing the sectors of growth and decline.
The subject's vitality, body, destiny, luck and constitutional type
Are subdivided according to the five types of relationship:
According to which one hundred and fifty pebbles are deployed,
Symbolising the sectors of growth and decline:
Here, the previously calculated five sub-columns of five aspects,
Starting from the (subject's] vitality,
Are each further subdivided according to the five relationships:
Identity, mother, son, friend and enemy.
Pebbles are then placed on the sectors of growth and decline,
Identity, mother, son, friend and enemy,
Which coincide with these:
[Making one hundred and twenty-five columns.]
Those representing the vitality and constitutional type upon the year sector,
These are calculated consecutively
In accordance with the sectors of growth and decline,
Until one hundred and twenty-five pebbles have been placed.
Those representing the body element upon the month sector,
Those representing the destiny element upon the day sector,
And those representing the luck element upon the hour sector.
Those marking the six auspicious sectors [of growth] are white,
And those marking the six inauspicious sectors (of decline] are black.
With the further addition of twenty-five 'pebbles of conclusive analyses',
[Placed in the final row of twenty-five columns)
They altogether number one hundred and fifty.



145
Divinations of natal horoscope
The divinatory predictions (kha-dmar)
The diverse topics analysed according to the natal horoscope, or divination of past lives and actions, are depicted on Plates 3–6.
A simplified model has been presented by Philipe Cornu in Tibetan Astrology, pp. 216–229, integrating calculations derived from
both Chinese elemental divination and Indian astrology. For the more detailed readings that correspond to our manuscript, however,
the appropriate predictions or divinatory interpretations are given in White Beryl, which states that there are eight pebbles symbolis-
ing divine glory (lha-dpal), long life (tshe) and demonic influence (bdud); four pebbles symbolising prosperity and misfortune (dpal-
byur gnyis); twelve pebbles symbolising the weight of past actions (rgya-ma); nine pebbles representing the mother's luck aspect
indicated through the four planets (gza'-bzhi ma-klungs); and numerous others representing the inauspicious years (lo-ngan), the
five approaches of bad luck (ngan-klungs-kyi sgo lnga), the results of growth and decline (dar-gud-kyi 'bras-bu), the birth of children
(bus-pa btsas-rtsis), and so forth.
Prognostications concerning natal years, months, days and hours (White Beryl, ff. 163a-177a)
Among the four precious pebbles (see chart 4.1, above), the ‘kingly’ pebble, indicative of the natal year, suggests if it is white that there
will be no imperial punishment and that if the subject is male there will be success in the marketplace, or if the subject is female she will
hear good news. If it is black, there will be royal punishment, there will be great sufferings and unremitting retributions for past actions.
Similarly, if the ‘minister' pebble, indicative of the natal month, is white, there will be no mistaking of friends, and the citizens will hardly
speak one word against the subject. If it is black, ministerial rank will be lost, the subject will be loved by the high and mighty but hated
by the populace, and will always be susceptible to enemies and disputations. If the 'soldier' pebble, indicative of the natal day, is white, the
armed forces will flourish, there will be no obstacles to a person's lifespan, and the subject will be unharmed by demons or humans.
However, if it is black, there will be quarrels, compensation claims, and constant disputations. Then, if the 'weapon' pebble, indicative of
the natal hour, is white, the resonance of the subject's past actions will be auspicious, and there will be growth in human and material
resources. If it is black, the weapons will rust, the lance of glorious reputation will break, and it will be inauspicious for all human and
material resources.
The natal years
Prognostications concerning the natal years focus successively on the vitality, body, destiny and luck elemental aspects of the natal year.
The first of these includes an abridged interpretation based on the twelve-year cycle and an elaborate interpretation based on the sixty-
year cycle. In the case of the twelve-year cycle, the characteristics of the respective subjects are profiled as follows (White Beryl,
ff. 163a-164a):24
1. Tiger year (stag-lo)
Those born in the tiger year are characterised by bravery, endeavour, ferocity, intelligence, stout-heartedness, a sense of superiority,
a strong bond of kinship, coarseness of conduct, harshness of speech, audacity, a plethora of ideas, and partiality for business activities
and gambling
2. Hare year (yos-lo)
Natives of the hare year are characteristically bachelors or spinsters who avoid idle conversation, favouring instead the renunciation of
social activities. Being well suited to the life of a vagabond, they will make do with an inadequate diet, and they will be indifferent to their
fathers, whether great kindness is shown to them or not. They will wear clothes simply to ward off the cold and do not expect clothing to
be provided through their mothers' kindness. They think only of the present, but despite their meagre diet, they are skilled in deceit.
They can set aside their anger and affect a gentle smiling demeanour. They will be susceptible to phlegm, bile and dental disorders.
3. Dragon year ('brug-lo)
Natives of the dragon year are not only ferocious, but lacking in breadth, balance and subtlety. Not simply loud-mouthed, they scorn the
inadequacies of others. Not merely energetic, they will never procrastinate, asserting that there will be time to relax once their purpose
has been achieved at the present moment through rigorous discipline. Short-tempered, kind-hearted and boisterous, they denigrate the
advice of others as well as their own limitations. If rare illnesses befall, there will be great danger to the life-essence.
4. Snake year (sbrul-lo)
Natives of the snake year are characteristically consumed by their own venom and burning anger, and they have an energetic spirit. If
they do not self-destruct, they will be envied by others; and even though they ponderously and stubbornly assert that they will continue
to be unharmed, within their darkest thoughts such bland expressions of unanimity cannot be feigned. If smitten by gastric or liver dis-
eases, it will be very critical for the subject's vitality.
5. Horse year (rta-lo)
Those born in the horse year are characteristically hyperactive, for the year is one endowed with a magical energy. Even though pursued
by a thousand miscreants, they will not fear being overwhelmed, for which reason they will be happy throughout their lives. Horse
natives heed the advice of others, and in turn the horse is beloved by others. Swift in motion and playful, they sacrifice their own goals in
the interest of others. Yet they are talkative insomniacs, and their health will be subject to great fluctuations.
6. Sheep year (lug-lo)
Natives of the sheep year are characteristically taciturn, slow-witted and stubborn, with a great appetite for food. They desist from harm-
ing others, but are incapable of helping very much. Nonetheless they display a genuine sense of gratitude for services rendered. Patient,
pure-hearted and relaxed, with a tendency to procrastinate, they do not overtly disclose their likes and dislikes, but are extremely loyal
and generous.



146
The White Beryl
BA
CLIA
TAL
On
RE
TELU
AUTY
.
MA
EESTI
LEC
SHE
ESTATE
T
AH
OS
YOR
TE
TASR
WARE
22
CA
20
ADI
SS
A
w
SO
OS
AZE
E
Above Detail of Plate 16, fig. 6 (see p. 176), showing inauspicious
year-signs of widowhood'
7. Monkey year (spre-lo)
Those born in the monkey year are characteristically short-tempered, tense and somewhat garrulous. Their bodies are subject to muscu-
lar palpitations and they are faint-hearted. It is uncertain where their thoughts may roam, like a bird's feather blowing over a mountain
pass, but they do enjoy amusements. Their words are unreliable, since they will frequently tell tales and esteem lies. Monkeys will eat all
sorts of impure foods, as if they were pure. They are hyperactive, and convinced of their own superiority.
Opposite Detail of Plate 16, fig. 6 (see p. 176), showing inauspicious
orphan' year-signs
8. Bird year (bya-lo)
Natives of the bird year will characteristically squander their inherited wealth. Arrogant and haughty, they ponder the limitations of oth-
ers, while denying their own. Their nature is one of great passion, for which reason they often have no choice when it comes to keeping
good or bad company. They like to cleanse themselves and can make do with little sleep. Despite their closed or blinded eyes, they are
physically light and agile, the head and body assisting their motion. However, they have a tendency to befriend others with negative ideas.
9. Dog year (khyi-lo)
Those born in the dog year are seldom liked, whether at home or abroad, on account of their fierce arrogance and rage. They act in a
direct forthright manner, and have no concealed wealth, for which reason they incur few losses. Finding no place for their minds to rest,
they will pursue many diverse and even futile ideas, which act as a tinder to ignite their minds. Investing great faith in inferiors, they are
swift-footed, extremely passionate, and prone to wanderlust. Yet they will befriend superiors who have come down in the world.
10. Pig year (phag-lo)
Natives of the pig year are dull-witted and of poor taste. When it come to food they have a low level of hygiene, but they have the poten-
tial to become excellent yogins. Although they enjoy eating, in their conduct they are somewhat ascetic. They will not fear others, even
when harshly addressed. They avariciously bite the hand that feeds them, without considering gratitude and blurring all moral scruples.
They will tell many lies if it is to their advantage. This is a year when positive values are becalmed and negative ones aggravated, charac-
terised generally by voracious appetites, dark frowns, anger, quarrels and malice.
11. Mouse year (byi-lo)
Those born in the mouse year characteristically covet the wealth of others. Though it is none of their business, they try to move like
thieves in the night, and although they hope to achieve their own happiness, their actions have the opposite effect, generating many ene-
mies. Outwardly untidy and inwardly fastidious, they show little generosity to their relatives, even by word of mouth. Yet once their
grand designs have faded, they will achieve some minor successes as they scurry around.



147
Divinations of natal horoscope
12. Ox year (glang-lo)
Natives of the ox year are not easily provoked into anger or quarrels. They like to rest and are poor in movement, obdurate, and ponder-
ous. Without placing their trust in anyone – for if they were to do so it would be said that heaven and earth had been agitated – they are
completely relaxed. They do not rejoice in anything, nor do they not rejoice! Patient, far-removed from negative actions, and broad-
minded, the ox enjoys eating and sleeping. Yet by dint of dependent origination, the impact of this sign is shown by association to be not
so different from that of the deluded neighbouring pig sign.
Following this short general description of the characteristics attributed to natives of the twelve year-signs, a more detailed profile is
then given for each of the years of the sexagenary cycle (White Beryl, ff. 1640–169a). It is important to note that whereas the sexagenary
cycle is generally formed by a combination of the twelve animals and the destiny element, here in White Beryl the emphasis is placed on
the corresponding vitality elements.25
1. Wood male mouse year (shing-pho byi-lo)
Natives of the wood mouse year have clear intelligence and they are skilled in arts and crafts. They excel in deceit and lying, and act so as
to deceive others through their skilful means. Their share of food will be moderate, they will be prone to many ailments due to serpentine
spirits, and their average lifespan will be seventy-five years, while they are likely to have five or three children, and be confronted by
seven obstacles.
2. Wood female ox year (shing-mo glang)
Natives of the wood ox year are inclined to sleep well during the night. They are intelligent and extremely jealous. With an average lifes-
pan of sixty years, they will be confronted by six obstacles but nonetheless amass food and wealth. Their life-spirit will be assaulted by
enemies and they will be afflicted by spirit lords of the soil on account of having disturbed the previously exorcised treacherous spirits of
affliction (phung-sri)26 and excavated the tombs.
3. Fire male tiger year (me-pho stag-lo)
Natives of the fire tiger year are most ferocious and physically strong, with round eyes and fierce pride. They will be harmful to friends
who do not help them, and they will always be susceptible to internal chronic ailments. Weak in faith and short-tempered, they are des-
tined to have two spouses and four children. Their average lifespan will be seventy-nine years and they will be confronted by five obsta-
cles. Born into the educated classes, they may succumb to injuries or leprosy since their pathological type is that of the serpentine spirits
and phlegm disorders.
22
DE UN



148
The White Beryl
4. Fire female hare year (me-mo yos-lo)
Natives of the fire hare year will have great mental afflictions and unpleasant speech. They will not speak the truth and will act deceit-
fully, scrutinising the faults of others and extolling their own virtues. They will take great pleasure in the company of the opposite sex,
while respecting the names of holy persons, and they will be of an erudite character. Confronted by seven obstacles, they will have an
average lifespan of seventy-five years, and an abundance of food, wealth and material resources. They will be afflicted by spirit lords of
the soil (sa-bdag) and king spirits (rgyal-po), and their parents may die of leprosy, their corpses being eaten by birds and dogs. They will
be most susceptible to serum and cold diseases and to severe heart and wind disorders.
5. Earth male dragon year (sa-pho 'brug-lo)
Natives of the earth dragon year will not speak the truth and they will have great faults. They will be extremely indolent, fond of alcohol,
and they will commit adultery. Their minds will be joyful, light and most deceitful, while their bodies will be afflicted by few diseases.
With an average lifespan of fifty-five years, they will be confronted by six obstacles, and they are destined to have five or seven children.
Born into the educated classes, they will have an abundance of food, wealth and material resources.
6. Earth female snake year (sa-mo sbrul-lo)
Natives of the earth snake year have great mental fortitude and dexterity. They will have an abundance of food, wealth and material
resources, but harbour great fear of thieves and enemies. Their prosperity will decline and property will be dissipated. Male natives may
die abroad, while spirit lords frequenting water and trees will cause affliction. Proud, angry, dark-complexioned, black-hearted, passion-
ate and jealous, they will take pleasure in the company of indolent and evil friends. Their average lifespan will be seventy-nine years, they
will be confronted by four obstacles, and they are destined to have much food and wealth, and six children. Yet they may commit suicide,
or be susceptible to injuries, nodes and muscular spasms.
7. Iron male horse year (Icags-pho rta-lo)
Natives of the iron horse year are extremely indolent and take pleasure in the company of their own relatives. They look out for faults in
others, neglecting their own faults, but delight in the company of their spouse. They will have an average lifespan of fifty-seven years and
be confronted by nine obstacles, but nonetheless they are destined to have four children, to endure much loss of wealth, and face hard-
ships in raising children. They will be afflicted by spirit lords of the soil on account of their involvement in plastering and masonry trades,
and they will largely be susceptible to cold and wind disorders.
CO
8. Iron female sheep year (Icags-mo lug-lo)
Natives of the iron sheep year are corpulent, with sluggish sense faculties and meagre recollection; they are also prone to eye diseases.
Their average lifespan will be eighty-one years, and they will be confronted by four obstacles, many foes, afflictions and disputations.
They are destined to have few children, and will be afflicted by serpentine spirits and haunting spirits (bstan).
9. Water male monkey year (chu-pho spre-lo)
Natives of the water monkey year are highly skilled and sensitive, with a high level of recollection and excellent motivational factors. They
will have an average lifespan of fifty-seven years, be confronted by seven obstacles, and become property owners in five towns or cities.
They will be unharmed, protected by the spirit lords of the soil who frequent land shaped like a fiery mass of flames, and they are destined to
have approximately three children. With great material resources and keen intelligence, they may fall victim to blood feuds or muggings.
OR
10. Water female bird year (chu-mo bya-lo)
Natives of the water bird year are both physically and mentally indolent and distracted. Their minds are unreliable and subject to poor
recollection. They enjoy travelling and have a wide circle of friends, but they also take delight in deception. Their average lifespan will be
sixty years, they will be confronted by nine obstacles, and fall under the sway of others. They will be afflicted by spirit lords of the soil
who frequent trees, as well as by disorders and fevers, while their friends and neighbours may become antagonistic. Destined to have two
children, they will be contaminated by klu-sman spirits27 who haunt meadows and by bewitchers ('gong-po).
10
Home
AL
VOLANT
TAA
11. Wood male dog year (shing-pho khyi-lo)
Natives of the wood dog year are highly skilled and sensitive, with a high level of recollection and excellent physical appearance. They
will have an average lifespan of seventy-nine years, be confronted by five obstacles, and may become the mayor of a town or city.
Associating with excellent klu-btsan spirits, 28 they are destined to have three children, and will be endowed with an abundance of short-
term material resources. However, there is a risk of blood feuds or pollution.
NA
12. Wood female pig year (shing-mo phag-lo)
Natives of the wood pig year are corpulent and muscular, wrathful, fierce and thoughtless. They are harmed due to their diet and sexual
relations, and deceived by friends and lovers. With an average lifespan of sixty-four years, they are confronted by five obstacles, and it is
generally feared that they will be inauspicious. The prospect of the family line coming to an end will be mitigated by wealth.
12
13. Fire male mouse year (me-pho byi-lo)
Natives of the fire mouse year have many thoughts, many recollections, and a great craving for wealth and food. They are skilled at
exposing the faults of others, and they strive to steal or kill. Their average lifespan will be sixty-eight years and they will be confronted
by five obstacles. But, contaminated by noble klu-sman spirits who frequent rocky and snow mountain peaks, they will be smitten by gas-
tric ailments, fevers and heart diseases. Generally speaking, despite being garrulous, in the depths of their heart they are self-controlled.
13



149
Divinations of natal horoscope
14. Fire female ox year (me-mo glang-lo)
Natives of the fire ox year are well-built, but sluggish and fond of over-sleeping. They may come to have defective eyesight, but their
houses will be well furnished. With an average lifespan of seventy-one years, they will be confronted by eight obstacles and subjected to
afflictions induced by king spirits (rgyal-po) who frequent temples. Their supply of grain and servants will increase, and they will be only
slightly harmed by enemies and evil spirits. Destined to have one son and two daughters, they will largely succumb to phlegm disorders.
14
15. Earth male tiger year (sa-pho stag-lo)
Natives of the earth tiger year will be corpulent and full of anger, and will take delight in killing. On account of their great craving for
food, they will be skilled in lies, in letters and in speech. There will incur few afflictions due to enemies and evil spirits, but spirit lords of
the soil frequenting agricultural land may cause lameness, and there will be tumours or dropsy. With an average lifespan of seventy-two
years, they will be confronted by seven obstacles, and may be harmed by rock-dwelling klu-btsan spirits. They are also destined to have
approximately two children.
16. Earth female hare year (sa-mo yos-lo)
Natives of the earth hare year are extremely talkative and intelligent. They will master grammar and various treatises. Their average
lifespan will be fifty years, and they will be confronted by six obstacles. Destined to have one child, they will have a meagre share of food
and wealth, and few material resources. They will commit adultery, enjoy playing games, and bring many disasters upon their relatives.
King spirits (rgyal-rigs) and serpentine spirits will be provoked, the parents may die of leprosy, and the subject may eventually die due to
chronic pulmonary diseases.
16
17. Iron male dragon year (Icags-pho 'brug-lo)
Natives of the iron dragon year are corpulent and strong, with great pride. Skilled in speech, they strive to commit negative deeds, and
postpone virtuous actions. They will incur great losses of wealth and, continuing to delight in negativity, will become outwardly and
inwardly harsh; for their hearts are evil even when their words appear to be gentle! They enjoy eating and do not speak the truth, resolutely
disclosing the faults of others. With an average lifespan of eighty years, they will be confronted by three obstacles, and are destined to have
either one or five children and an abundance of material resources. Yet they may be afflicted by king spirits (rgyal-po) who cause madness.
17
18. Iron female snake year (Icags-mo sbrul-lo)
Natives of the iron snake year are characteristically perceptive and skilled in the arts. They take delight in examining the faults of others;
they incite theft, make enemies, and are subjected to many afflictions as they associate with evil friends. With an average lifespan of sev-
enty-eight years, they will be confronted by six obstacles, and their share of food and wealth will be greater in later life than in early life.
They will stay with their parents for only a short time, and after they have befriended others, their parents may die due to leprosy or con-
tagious fever. The demons of suicide may cast their afflictions, while angina, muscular spasm and insanity may ensue. It is said they are
destined to have three children.
18
19. Water male horse year (chu-pho rta-lo)
Natives of the water horse year are said to be extremely intelligent. They do not disclose the faults of others, and they are skilled in arts
and crafts. Unencumbered by excessive ignorance or bewilderment, they possess a number of fine virtues and intermittently engage in
agriculture. Although they possess little anger or guile, they do understand the faults of others and will not become dependent on others.
Their average lifespan will be seventy-seven or fifty-seven years, and they will have an abundance of food, wealth and material resources.
Destined to have three or four children, they will be subject to heart and wind disorders and afflictions caused by spirit lords of the soil,
bad reputation, ending of the family line, and spirits who have a disastrous impact on wealth, as well as by king spirits (rgyal-po) and
attachment spirits (bsen-mo) who frequent property.
19
20. Water female sheep year (chu-mo lug-lo)
Natives of the water sheep year are characteristically of feeble intelligence and they delight in travelling. Endowed with great cravings,
they will be confronted by five obstacles and are destined to have few children, but an abundance of food, wealth and material resources.
Their average lifespan will be seventy-three years, and they will fear thieves and enemies. However, their prosperity will gradually
decline, their horses and cattle being dispersed, and if the subject is male he will die abroad. Plague-causing spirits (gnyan) who frequent
wood and water will cause afflictions, as will the spirit lords of the soil, and phlegm diseases will predominate.
20
21. Wood male monkey year (shing-pho spre-lo)
Natives of the wood monkey year are corpulent and endowed with great yearnings. They will be confronted by five obstacles, and delight in
the company of evil friends. With an average lifespan of seventy-eight years, they make do with little sleep, and have many foes. Mentally,
they are extremely agile. Though they downplay their own ambitions, they will come to possess two homes. Subject to many ailments, they
will not engage in disputations, but afflictions will nonetheless ensue due to haunting spirits (bstan), spirit lords of the soil and king spirits who
all frequent river valleys and mountain slopes. Their share of food will be above average and they are destined to have one or five children.
21
AODAS
22. Wood female bird year (shing-mo bya-lo)
Natives of the wood bird year are characteristically prone to many chronic ailments. The elderly will particularly be disturbed by
humoral imbalances and the agitation of the plague-causing spirits (gnyan). The average lifespan will be sixty years, friends and relatives
will become enemies, and there will be afflictions due to evil spirits who delight in fighting and the ghosts of female murder victims (gre-
mo) who cannot be controlled. They are destined to have one or three children.
22



150
The White Beryl
UU
35
G
210
39122
COLOR
ise-
VER
ONS
ESTROS
BE
SU
SE
PRESSE
G
COS
V
GA
DEN
OSNO
DER
SS
HO
OOO
TA
CORO
STA
E
VE
23. Fire male dog year (me-pho khyi-lo)
Though subject to many diseases and the ending of the family line, natives of the fire dog year display virtue and patience. There will be
afflictions due to spirit lords of the soil who frequent wildernesses, and the subject's house may be incinerated. There will be fevers and
bile diseases, and afflictions due to the ghosts of male murder victims (gre-bo), haunting spirits (bstan) and spirit lords of the soil. With an
average lifespan of sixty-eight years, they will be confronted by seven obstacles, and are destined to have three children.
23
24. Fire female pig year (me-mo phag-lo)
Natives of the fire pig year have weak bodies that succumb to many ailments. Fevers and bile disorders will predominate, but there will
also be afflictions due to the ghosts of male murder victims (gre-bo), haunting spirits (bstan), and spirit lords of the soil. Superiors will
grow hostile and their house will be burnt down. With an average lifespan of sixty-eight years, they will be confronted by seven obsta-
cles, and are destined to have three children.
24
25. Earth male mouse year (sa-pho byi-lo)
Natives of the earth mouse year are short in stature and take delight in killing. They are indolent and endowed with severe faults. If they
fall ill, phlegm disorders will afflict the stomach, and death may follow due to injuries. Gentle in speech, they are selfishly intent upon
achieving their own advantage. Their average lifespan will be sixty-eight years, they will be confronted by seven obstacles and are des-
tined to have one child.
25
26. Earth female ox year (sa-mo glang-lo)
Natives of the earth ox year are ponderous, and endowed with excessive pride, but scant food, wealth and material resources. They will
be afflicted by spirit lords of the soil who frequent their localities, and they will be slightly susceptible to bad reputation. Their minds will
be harsh, quarrelsome and fierce. With an average lifespan of fifty years, they are destined to have one child and will be confronted by
seven obstacles.
26
27. Iron male tiger year (Icags-pho stag-lo)
Natives of the iron tiger year are characteristically wrathful, fierce and fond of killing, while being generous at the same time. They have
an excellent fair-complexioned physique, and a great craving for meat and wine. They speak harshly, and may be afflicted by haunting
spirits (bstan) and king spirits who frequent knives and weapons. With an average lifespan of sixty years, they are prone to the ingress of
suddenly-arising primordial bewitchers (ye-'brog), and will be confronted by five obstacles. Destined to have two or four children, their
share of food, wealth and material resources will be unstable.
27



151
Divinations of natal horoscope
Opposite Detail of Plate 16, fig. 5 (see p. 174), showing the ‘odd-
numbered' year-signs according to the Store of Precious Treasure
28. Iron female hare year (Icags-mo yos-lo)
Natives of the iron hare year are broad-minded and indolent. Yet they may also display a great sense of endeavour and keen intelligences,
since they are well-educated. They display loving kindness and generosity to others, despite being susceptible to painful diseases and
running the risk of accidental death. There will be afflictions due to blood feuds, spirit lords of the soil, and attachment spirits (bsen-mo)
who frequent temples overlooking fortified places. With an average lifespan of sixty-one years, they will be confronted by five obstacles
and are destined to have five children, with an adequate share of food, wealth and material resources.
Below Detail of Plate 16, fig. 5 (see p. 174), showing the even-
numbered' year-signs according to the Store of Precious Treasure
28
29. Water male dragon year (chu-pho 'brug-lo)
Natives of the water dragon year characteristically have moles on their bodies, and they continuously change their residence. They enjoy
archery and other sports, and although they have much wealth and children, their family line may well come to an end, for they have
many foolish relatives. With an average lifespan of sixty-two years, they will be confronted by six obstacles and are destined to have one
or five children, but it is said they will squander whatever food, wealth or material resources they possess.
29
30. Water female snake year (chu-mo sbrul-lo)
Natives of the water snake year have smouldering anger in their hearts. In friendships they value material resources above people, and
they are prepared to indulge in slander, however contrived. With an average lifespan of sixty-eight years, they have many relatives who
will bring an end to the family line; they will also be subject to afflictions due to king spirits who frequent property and spirit lords of the
soil who haunt red rocks. There is the risk of cold and wind diseases, and they are destined to have few children.
31. Wood male horse year (shing-pho rta-lo)
Natives of the wood horse year are most deceitful and are not easily befriended. They are endowed with an angry temperament and dull
intellect. Their faith and motivation are meagre, and yet they have considerable strength and ascetic qualities. Delighting in the com-
pany of their few friends, they are talkative, but susceptible to wind and phlegm disorders, and afflictions caused by king spirits and the
spirit lords of the soil. With an average lifespan of sixty years, they are destined to have one child and will be confronted by three sets of
three obstacles.
31
32. Wood female sheep year (shing-mo lug-lo)
Natives of the wood sheep year are corpulent with clear sense-faculties. They will have an average lifespan of sixty years and are destined
to have two children and be confronted by three obstacles. Yet they are foolish and enjoy over-eating.



152
The White Beryl
33. Fire male monkey year (me-pho spre-lo)
Natives of the fire male monkey year will have an average lifespan of sixty-seven years, and they will be susceptible to many wind and bile
disorders. They take delight in ornaments and clothes, but will be confronted by five obstacles. They may become the headmen of five vil-
lages, enjoying an abundance of food, wealth and material resources, and they are destined to have five children. Rough in speech and
physically strong, with intense desires, they proudly scrutinise the faults of others. In all, their wealth will be inauspicious.
33
34. Fire female bird year (me-mo bya-lo)
Natives of the fire bird year characteristically have many ideas and great guile. They can assume contrived facial expressions of wrath,
and make efforts to excel in theft and killing. With poor recollection and strong desires, they are afflicted by the female ghosts of murder
victims (gre-mo) who frequent charnel grounds and temples. Their average lifespan will be sixty-five years, and they will be confronted
by six obstacles. They live in fear of being wounded, but take great delight in promiscuity.
34
35. Earth male dog year (sa-pho khyi-lo)
Natives of the earth male dog year are short-tempered, wrathful, whimsical, garrulous and intensely passionate. They will take delight in
cursing others and make efforts in sporting contests, while combined wind and bile disorders will take their toll. They will dream of
befriending the dead and, experiencing unhappiness, they will come to possess scant material resources. Destined to have three or four
children, they will be afflicted by devouring spirits (za'-'dre) who haunt the tombs of their great-grandfathers. Their average lifespan will
be seventy years and they will be confronted by seven obstacles.
35
36. Earth female pig year (sa-mo phag-lo)
Natives of the earth pig year will have little knowledge, but many enemies and afflictions. They will bring little benefit to their relatives
and acquaintances, and they will be afflicted by male ancestral spirits (pho-'dre) and by spirit lords of the soil who frequent fish-shaped
fields. Their average lifespan will be seventy-seven years, and they will be confronted by six obstacles. Destined to have two children,
their share of food, wealth and material resources will be abundant.
36
E
9
AV
VE
the
37. Iron male mouse year (Icags-pho byi-lo)
Natives of the iron mouse year are corpulent and perceptive. They enjoy playing games and their elegance and beauty enable them to
stand out from the crowd. They participate in all sorts of activities with good faith and good will, and despite their ability to harm or help
others they meet few enemies or impediments. They will also enjoy fighting and incur great losses of wealth. Yet generally speaking they
play down their own ambitions and respect those of others. Their average lifespan will be fifty-seven years and they are destined to have
five children and be confronted by six obstacles. Their share of wealth and grain will be secure, and they will not become dependent on
potentates, for which reason they will be respected by all persons.
a
37-38
38. Iron female ox year (Icags-mo glang-lo)
Natives of the iron ox year are physically light-weight and learned in diverse arts and crafts. They are appreciative of ethical behaviour,
and they incur few afflictions due to ill-health or enemies. Prone to sleep and indolence, they enjoy the company of friends and kings.
Afflictions may come, however, due to spirit lords of the soil who frequent rivers. Their average lifespan will be fifty-five years, they will
be confronted by seven obstacles, and are destined to have two children. In all, they are fierce and extremely stubborn.
39. Water male tiger year (chu-pho stag-lo)
Natives of the water tiger year have a coarse physique, energetic temperament and joyful disposition. Narcissistic and delighting in self-
praise, they have flaws which are difficult to rectify. They may speak nobly but hold bad intentions within their hearts, and enjoy promis-
cuity. Their average lifespan will be seventy-one years, they will be confronted by seven obstacles, be divorced, and have a single child.
Also they will largely squander whatever food and wealth they possess.
39–40
40. Water female hare year (chu-mo yos-lo)
Natives of the water hare year do not place their trust in others; yet their associates will mostly be of a negative disposition. Delighting in
business and in over-sleeping, they will allow their paternal home to be snatched away. Overwhelmed by forgetfulness and miserliness,
they will be afflicted by king spirits who frequent charnel grounds and temples; and they will dream of falling into a great abyss. Their
average lifespan will be seventy-two years, and they are destined to have important children.
41. Wood male dragon year (shing-pho 'brug-lo)
Natives of the wood dragon year are skilled in the arts, refined in speech and easy to befriend. They are susceptible predominantly to bile
diseases, and subject to varying inclinations - sometimes wishing to travel and sometimes wishing to stay at home. Their average lifes-
pan will be sixty-six years, they will be confronted by six obstacles, and are destined to have few children. They will be afflicted by spirit
lords of the soil who frequent small springs, and although others will envy them greatly, they will possess their rightful share of food and
wealth.
41-42
42. Wood female snake year (shing-mo sbrul-lo)
Natives of the wood snake year are small-minded and physically tall, beloved by superiors and hated by inferiors. They are susceptible to
few diseases and they will have sons. Characteristically they will pursue their own interests above others, and will be endowed with an
abundance of food, wealth and material resources. Their average lifespan will be seventy-seven years and they will be confronted by four
obstacles. Open in speech but actually narrow-minded, they will be inauspicious in matters of wealth, and they are extremely narcissistic.



153
Divinations of natal horoscope
43. Fire male horse year (me-pho rta-lo)
Natives of the fire horse year are wrathful and fierce, stubborn and fond of fighting. Their share of wealth will diminish in the long-term.
They will value horses and dogs, but will have to strive to make friends since they bring harm to people. They will love their spouses, and
since their material resources are fleeting, they will permit themselves to indulge only in short-term desires. They will be susceptible to
many pulmonary ailments and fevers, as well as to afflictions caused by the ghosts of male murder victims (gre-bo) and king spirits.
Confronted by seven obstacles, they are destined to have two children, and will have an average lifespan of seventy-eight years.
43–44
44. Fire female sheep year (me-mo lug-lo)
Natives of the fire sheep year are corpulent, upright and capable of long-standing friendships. They will achieve whatever purpose they
have in their minds. Their voices are pleasant, as are their minds; yet they have a great craving for wealth and will be confronted by seven
obstacles. Their average lifespan will be seventy-seven years, and they will have many children and grandchildren. However, there will
be many afflictions due to foes, demons and spirit lords of the soil frequenting triangular fields. There will also be chronic kidney ailments.
45. Earth male monkey year (sa-pho spre-lo)
Natives of the earth monkey year are easy to befriend. Their conduct is refined, their perception measured, and their speech skilful. All their
actions are meaningful, they have little pride and possess a sense of purpose, meriting the respect of all. Their average lifespan will be sev-
enty-eight years, they will be confronted by nine life-threatening obstacles, and they are destined to have three children. Endowed with
wealth and cattle, they will succumb to wind and phlegm diseases, and to afflictions due to spirit lords of the soil who frequent circular fields.
45–46
46. Earth female bird year (sa-mo bya-lo)
Natives of the earth bird year are characteristically light-hearted and perceptive. They will be friendly to others, but have a short temper,
combined with great jealousy, miserliness, pride and desire. They will be afflicted by spirit lords of the soil who frequent houses and land.
Their vision and sense-faculties will be defective, and they will be susceptible predominantly to bile diseases. Their average lifespan will
be seventy years, they will be confronted by seven obstacles, and are destined to have six children.
47. Iron male dog year (Icags-pho khyi-lo)
Natives of the iron dog year are perceptive, refined in conduct, pure-hearted and intent upon virtuous actions. They are skilled in the arts
but have little to say. Nonetheless, they possess a worldly intelligence which is extremely deluded. Fond of over-sleeping, their granaries
and resources will prosper, and they are destined to have three or four children. Generally speaking, they will be shy and modest, living
in fear of thieves. Their average lifespan will be seventy-seven years and they will be confronted by seven obstacles.
47-48
48. Iron female pig year (Icags-mo phag-lo)
Natives of the iron pig year are perceptive and refined in conduct. If they are male, they will become worthy of veneration and suitable
recipients of offering. They will have two spouses and glorious attributes, but afflictions will initially come from the surrounding lands.
They are destined to have two or four children, they will be confronted by seven obstacles, and their average lifespan will be seventy years.
49. Water male mouse year (chu-pho byi-lo)
Natives of water male mouse year are extremely elegant, calm and collected. Their average lifespan will be seventy-two years, they will
be confronted by seven obstacles and are destined to have two or five children. They may incur great losses of wealth and of food, and will
have to strive hard to obtain their fair share. They are full of desires and enjoy promiscuity; their minds are influenced by guile and deceit.
Afflictions will come due to spirit lords of the soil and plague-causing spirits (gnyan) who frequent woods in the east.
49-50
50. Water female ox year (chu-mo glang-lo)
Natives of the water ox year are extremely foolish, fond of over-sleeping and indolence. They will have an average lifespan of seventy
years, and will be confronted by seven obstacles. They will be evil-minded, harsh in word and unpleasant in speech. They are extremely
narcissistic and selfish. Even though they may speak gently to others, ultimately they will engage in many deceitful actions. They will
witness the corpses of countless children, and after the cremations they will be afflicted by spirit lords of the soil.
51. Wood male tiger year (shing-pho stag-lo)
Natives of the wood tiger year are wrathful, fierce and fond of fighting. Their average lifespan will be sixty-six years, they will be con-
fronted by five obstacles, and are destined to have three children, with an abundant share of food and wealth. They will have strong
desires and are consumed with miserliness. In their hearts they harbour jealousy and are quite selfish and taciturn in dealing with other
people. They will be susceptible to tumours and dropsy, and may die of injuries or wounds. There will be ill-health due to angina and
muscular spasm, and afflictions due to the spirit lords of the soil. They will get married near the end of their lives, and there will be many
illegitimate children, and consequently many step-mothers and step-children, while they will enjoy promiscuity and going out at night.
Afflictions will also come due to king spirits and malign goblins (the'u-brang) who frequent goats and donkeys.
51-52
52. Wood female hare year (shing-mo yos-lo)
Natives of the wood hare year are crafty, and they greatly enjoy the company of the opposite sex. They commit adultery and constantly
indulge in play, song and dance. Their average lifespan will be sixty-seven years, and they will have many fears due to ill-health and ene-
mies. Members of other families will be cast aside; and there will be step-mothers, step-fathers and illegitimate children. Narcissistic and
whimsical, they will be afflicted by bse-rags demons29 who pursue goats and donkeys. They will be confronted by six obstacles and they
are destined to have children in early and later life:



154
The White Beryl
53. Fire male dragon year (me-pho 'brug-lo)
Natives of the fire dragon year are said to be corpulent and wealthy. They will be combative in the presence of their relatives, and incur
many afflictions due to thieves and enemies. If they are householders they will marry a widowed person. They will have good appetites,
and great dexterity even when resources are scant. Their average lifespan will be seventy-one years, they will be confronted by seven
obstacles and are destined to have two children. They will be susceptible to combined wind and bile disorders and their wealth will be
haunted by malign goblins (the'u-brang). Nonetheless they will acquire an abundance of food, wealth and material resources.
53-54
54. Fire female snake year (me-mo sbrul-lo)
Natives of the fire snake year are corpulent, subject to few diseases, and endowed with many friendships. They will marry five or seven
spouses and become rich, presiding over a town or city. They will sustain others and be respected by all. Learned in all the artistic trea-
tises, their average lifespan will be seventy-one years, they will be confronted by seven obstacles, and have two children. Nonetheless,
wind and bile diseases will take their toll, the graves of their aged parents will be desecrated by birds and dogs, and there will be all sorts
of impediments, not to mention afflictions due to serpentine spirits or spirit lords of the soil.
55. Earth male horse year (sa-pho rta-lo)
Natives of the earth horse year are characteristically brave and short-tempered, while their words are unreliable. All those of lesser skills
invest their hopes in such persons. However, their merits are impeded by great obstacles, and there will be many afflictions due to ene-
mies and ill-health. Their average lifespan will be seventy-five years, they will be confronted by seven obstacles, and they are destined to
have two children. They will be afflicted by anger and by gods or demons who frequent monastic treasuries, as well as by bad reputation,
king spirits, and spirit lords of the soil who frequent semi-circular fields.
55-56
56. Earth female sheep year (sa-mo lug-lo)
Natives of the earth sheep year are prone to many diseases and go in fear of enemies. Their average lifespan will be sixty years, and they
will be confronted by four obstacles. Enemies will arise to reduce their siblings' wealth, and there will also be bad reputation, and
afflictions due to leprosy and injuries. Outsiders will be well-disposed, but family members will become resentful. It is also said that there
will be great losses, a single descendent, and mixed fortunes. They will delight in careless speech. If they are male subjects they will be
drawn to their daughters and to their sons if they are female. In general, they will be extremely selfish and proud.
57. Iron male monkey year (Icags-pho spre-lo)
Natives of the iron monkey year are loved by all who set eyes upon them. They are extremely beautiful and attractive, and will have an
abundance of wealth and material resources. They will be energetic, but may well incur great losses and endure blood feuds. The portents
suggest that if they have to strive to obtain their share of food, they will be happy in old age. Their average lifespan will be seventy years,
and they will be confronted by eight obstacles. Destined to have one or five children, they will be afflicted by the bad reputation of certain
deities, and smitten by anger or strokes. There will be afflictions due to suicidal demons, and fear of wars or enemies.
57-58
58. Iron female bird year (Icags-mo bya-lo)
Natives of the iron bird year are glorious and masterful, endowed with much wealth, grain, and an abundance of food and drink. They
have strong attachments but can love their enemies. They will become leaders of mankind, invariably endowed with material resources.
Nonetheless there will be afflictions due to demons associated with blood feuds and leprosy-causing demons. Their average lifespan will
be seventy years, they will be confronted by seven obstacles, and are destined to have four children. Their health will eventually succumb
to wind diseases and fevers.
59. Water male dog year (chu-pho khyi-lo)
Natives of the water dog year are always miserly, and go in fear of diseases and enemies. Their bodies have many ugly marks, and are
generally susceptible to ill-health and injuries. Ignored by relatives and friends, they persevere with negative and non-virtuous actions.
Their average lifespan will be seventy-three years, and they will be afflicted by evil spirits, demons, impediments and spirit lords of the
soil, as well as by bse-rags demons and king spirits. They are destined to have few children and little wealth, and there will invariably be
fear of weapons and potentates.
59-60
60. Water female pig year (chu-mo phag-lo)
Lastly, natives of the water pig year are characteristically perceptive and endowed with firm intelligence. They delight in exposing those
who are manifestly proud or jealous, and they are wealthy. Their average lifespan will be sixty years and they will be confronted by five
obstacles. Destined to have four children, they will own cows, food, property and grain. Afflictions will come when serpentine spirits are
attacked by tomb construction, or due to the spirit lords of the soil who frequent trees, or else due to the maternal relatives. There will be
the risk of suicide or fatal falls.
Prognostications concerning body, destiny
and luck aspects of the years
When a natal horoscope is cast, the aforementioned readings based on the vitality element of the natal year are not considered sufficient.
In order to obtain a clearer impression of the year in question, it will be important to supplement these prognostications with others
based on the body element, the type of relationship formed between the vitality and destiny elements, and the luck element.
Among these, prognostications concerning the body elements of the years are both abridged and detailed. In the
former case, the characteristics of the five body elements are described sequentially (f. 169a/b). For example, those with a wood body ele-
ment are unattached drifters with variable shares of food and wealth. Earning official disapproval and befriending thieves, they are
ineffectual, dissimulating, and likely to squander their inherited wealth, or allow it to fluctuate. In the latter case, the characteristics of



ES
Above Detail of Plate 16, fig. 2 (see p. 173), showing the 'odd-
numbered' and 'even-numbered year-signs according to the
Accurate Tradition
Dmc way.
the thirty pairs of year-signs sharing a common body element (kha-srog sum-cu) are presented (ff. 1696–172b). For example, the body ele-
ment of the wood mouse and wood ox years is known as the body of iron-ore', which is derived from the hips and thighs of the divination
turtle. Birth within this body element may indicate that one's parents of the previous life had defiled an iron utensil, so that they suffered
from diarrhoea, podagra or rheumatism, and died due to dropsy or oedemata. The house was ruined and the children neglected.
Consequently, owing to the presence of a bewitched water-mill in the house, the subject who has this body element is susceptible to
demonic influence which afflicts the bones. If, in addition, the birth coincides with a multiple of nine or with the mother's iron element or
Dva trigram, the child will be born under a trigram and numeric square that promote diseases of the lower part of the body. It may be
swift-footed but disabled in some way.
Prognostications concerning the destiny elements of the years are set forth according to the five types of relation-
ship that the destiny element may have with the vitality element, namely kha-yan (ff. 1726–173b), khong-nong (ff. 173b–174a), se-zhig (ff.
174a-175a), 'dun-khur (ff. 1752-176a) and kha-ral (f. 176a/b). In the White Beryl, each of these five types is discussed in general and then
readings are given for the specific wood, fire, water, iron and earth years that typify these relationships – respectively in terms of the sub-
ject's paternal relatives, spouse, children or wealth, in-laws and maternal relatives. For example, in the case of the kha-yan relationship
formed by the wood tiger or hare years, which concerns the subject's paternal relatives, it is said that such a relative may die accidentally
or may run the risk of blood feuds as a result of the known reports and eye-witness accounts of him offending the paternal ancestors'
domain or tombs. Even though such paternal relatives may be strong, one should not befriend them for long.
Prognostications concerning the luck aspect of the year-signs are arranged according to the four groups of three
compatible signs sharing the same luck aspects (ff. 1765-177a), i.e. those of mouse, dragon and monkey; those of tiger, horse and dog;
those of bird, ox, and snake; and those of pig, sheep and hare. For example, the luck aspect of the mouse, dragon and monkey years sug-
gests that the subject's father, paternal uncle and grandfather are completely virtuous and powerful, sheltering the subject from the
effects of a bad reputation. In this way, a more specific reading for the natal year is gradually constructed.



156
The White Beryl
Prognostications concerning inhibition of the four aspects
(gcod-'dral kha-dmar; White Beryl, ff. 177a-178a)
Divinations of the natal year may also be undertaken by comparing the subject's elemental aspects of vitality, body, destiny and luck, and
determining whether these are identical, or whether there are inhibitions or enhancements present due respectively to enemy- or friend-
relationships being formed. Various readings are possible, and the category of inhibitions due to enemy-relationships is expounded in
White Beryl (ff. 1770-178a).
These may entail the inhibition of the body, destiny or luck element due to the presence of an inimical vitality ele-
ment; the inhibition of the vitality, destiny or luck element due to the presence of an inimical body element; the inhibition of the body,
vitality or luck element due to the presence of an inimical destiny element; the inhibition of the body element due to the presence of both
inimical destiny and vitality elements; the inhibition of the destiny element due to the presence of both inimical vitality and body ele-
ments; the inhibition of the luck element due to the presence of inimical destiny and vitality elements; the inhibition of the destiny, vital-
ity or luck element due to the presence of all the other three being inimical; or, conversely, the protection or enhancement of the vitality
element due to the presence of all the other three in a friend-relationship.
This type of divination is said to derive from a secret and directly pointed-out instruction (sbas-pa mdzub-tshugs).
Generally nine pebbles are cast, representing the contrast between the subject’s vitality and destiny elements (1), body and destiny ele-
ments (2), luck and destiny elements (3), body and vitality elements (4), destiny and vitality elements (5), luck and vitality elements (6),
vitality and luck element (7), body and luck elements (8) and destiny and luck elements (9).
If the destiny element is inhibited due to an inimical relationship with the vitality, body or luck element, the pre-
diction is known as the "Khor-lo rab-stongs Star’,30 portending that even though one has hundreds of cattle and thousands of bags (gnag-
brgya khug-stong), one will finally become a beggar. If the vitality element is inhibited due to an inimical relationship with the body, des-
tiny or luck element, the prediction is known as the ‘Phe'u sha-ral Star”,31 portending that even though one might have accomplished
meditation throughout one's life one will finally die of a stab wound. If the luck element is inhibited due to the presence of an inimical
relationship with the vitality, body or destiny element, the prediction is known as the 'Bya-dmar me-len Star”,32 portending that even
though one might have many children and grandchildren, there is a risk of finally having no descendants to continue the family line.
However, if any aspect is protected or enhanced by a friend-relationship with one of those three, the prediction is known as the “gShin-
chu rab-bsrung Star”,38 portending that even though a woman may have reached the age of sixty without having a child, she will not
finally die without descendants. Model chart 4.9 is employed in respect of a subject born in the earth snake year.
4.9 Exemplary chart
Pebbles representing the secret directly pointed-out divination (sbas-pa mdzub-tshugs rde) - 'earth snake' subject
destiny contrasted with vitality (srog-dbang): 'Khor-lo rab-stong prediction
ОХ
vitality contrasted with body (lus-srog): Phe'u sha-ral prediction
OX
luck contrasted with vitality (srog-klung): Bya-dmar me-len prediction
XX
destiny contrasted with body (lus-dbang): gShin-chu rab-bsrung prediction
00
luck contrasted with body (lus-klung): gShin-chu rab-bsrung prediction
0
00
vitality contrasted with destiny (dbang-srog): gShin-chu rab-bsrung prediction
vitality contrasted with luck (klung-srog): gShin-chu rab-bsrung prediction
destiny contrasted with luck (klung-dbang): 'Khor-lo rab-stong prediction
XX
00
luck contrasted with destiny (dbang-klung): gShin-chu rab-bsrung prediction
00
On this type of divination, Lo-chen Dharmaśrī writes (Moonbeams, ff. 23b–24a):
Moreover, there are the instructions taught
And only the remaining three are actually contrasted with it,
The prediction conforms to the 'Phe'u sha-ral [Star].
by secret direct pointing out:34
[So that nine pebbles are altogether deployed).
If [any elemental aspect] is protected (or enhanced]
One should recognise that there are nine pebbles
If the destiny element is inhibited
[When contrasted with a friendly elemental aspect]
The prediction conforms to the 'gShin-chu rab-bsrung' (Star).
Marking the contrast between the subject's four elemental aspects:
[When contrasted] with an (inimical] vitality, body or luck element,
The prediction conforms to the ''Khor-lo rab-stongs' [Star].
Vitality, body, destiny and luck,
If the luck element is inhibited
And his or her own vitality, destiny and luck elements.
If the subject's vitality element is inhibited
[When contrasted] with an [inimical] vitality, body or destiny element,
The elemental aspect identical to the contrasting elemental aspect is omitted,
[When contrasted] with an [inimical] body, destiny or luck element,
The prediction conforms to the 'Bya-dmar me-len' (Star).
Prognostications concerning natal months, days, hours and
derivative year-aspects (White Beryl, ff. 1780-180b)
As for prognostications concerning the natal months, these are subdivided according to the seasons of the year: the first seasonal months
are those of the tiger, monkey, pig or snake; the mid-seasonal months are those of the mouse, horse, bird and hare; and the last seasonal
months are those of the ox, sheep, dog and dragon (ff. 1789–179b).
For example, in the case of natives of the first seasonal months, there is a danger that their siblings and parents
might be cursed, which would affect their physical well-being, but they themselves will be utterly fearless. They may get divorced or
encounter divorce, their parents may incur the enmity of Bon priests or Buddhist monks, the protector deities may be neglected, sons
may cease to maintain their family residence, or else the residence itself will be destroyed.
In the case of natives of the mid-seasonal months, little gratitude will be shown for the parents, and the subject
will selfishly put himself or herself above all. Wealth will be squandered in early life but retained in later life. They will have disabled chil-
dren, or else they will have to sustain two families. Their relatives will be enraged, there will be false accusations, and they will have to
pass time abroad.
In the case of natives of the last seasonal months, the family residence will be moved or destroyed, for which rea-
son disputations will arise concerning the land and the household. An unrelated person will become a neighbour, and there will be family
dissension. Sons will cease to maintain their fathers' residences, and so forth. More detailed prognoses are then given for each of the four
natal seasons in turn.
Prognostications for the natal days and hours are not specified at this juncture (see f. 179b), since they are more
clearly exposited in Chapter 30 of the White Beryl, which concerns the impact of the hour of divination.95
Finally, a series of further predictions is also given (ff. 1796–180b) for the years of greater penalty (chad-chen),
lesser penalty (chad-chung), mother-relationship (ma-lo), identity-or destiny-relationship (dbang-lo), son-relationship (bu-lo), friend-rela-
tionship (grogs-lo) and enemy-relationship (dgra-lo).



157
Divinations of natal horoscope
Prognostications concerning natal trigrams (White Beryl, ff. 1806–182a)
In addition to predictions based on the natal year, month, day and hour, the horoscope may also take into account the subject's natal tri-
gram and numeric square. These are important because the duration of the lifespan may be predicted by determining the relationship
between a mother's natal trigram and numeric square and the children's vitality, body, destiny and luck elements. The predictions are
detailed, and each of the natal trigrams will be considered in turn.36
Li trigram
Those whose birth coincides with the Li trigram enjoy the company of slanderers, steal the homes of their fathers and fathers-in-law, and
engage in false accusations. Their heads and sense-organs will have some disability. If the subject is male there will be bloodshed, injuries,
retribution due to overboiling stoves, and physical conflict with the father and grandfather, resulting in head injuries. If the subject is
female, she will have a disabled child. There is the risk of being infected by plagues due to disturbances of gods (deva) and serpentine spirits
provoked by an overboiling stove; and of having disabled children. In cases when the grandfather has flourished, the family wealth will be
divided into four or five parts. The local tombs will be harsh and face the south-west. The governing deity is rGyal-po btsan-bdud 'go, and
harm will be inflicted by the bewitchers ('gong-po), for which reason if the spirit lords of the soil cause harm, it will be hard to reverse.
Khon trigram
Those whose birth coincides with the Khon trigram are subject to faults associated with the defective construction of ancestral tombs.
Their family line will be susceptible to imbecility, dumbness, disturbance of the serpentine spirits, lameness, asphyxia, and accidental
death. All the wealth accumulated by two generations of the paternal ancestors will be squandered, and it will be hard to reconstitute it.
Harmed by curses, they will constantly be consumed by hatred, it will be difficult for them to raise children, and there will be divorce or
widowhood. Gently spoken but wrathful and fierce, they will be rich in early life and poor in later life. The local tombs will be pale yellow
in colour and the road in front will be cut by a ravine. The presiding deity is Nag-smug klu-sman 'go, and afflictions will be caused by
spirit lords of the soil and female serpentine spirits (nāginī).
Dva trigram
Those whose birth coincides with the Dva trigram have fathers or grandfathers who were maliciously slain by their retainers on account
of a blood feud or injury. There will be afflictions due to demons who haunt turquoise ornaments and armour, and the subject may well
die abroad. The paternal ancestors will have three or four generations of descendants, and the local tombs will be yellow or black, facing
west or north. Wealth and property will be somewhat scant. Pure-hearted, short-tempered and prone to anger, they will possess little
guile, but much ferocity, courage, education and self-sufficiency. However, the maternal relatives will be cursed, while land and property
will be squandered, leading eventually to accidental death, colic and afflictions due to haunting spirits (bstan), lifelong companion gods
('go) and the ghosts of murder victims (gre-bo).
Khen trigram
Those whose birth coincides with the Khen trigram will have parental ancestors who are lame, deformed, imbecilic, dumb or hunch-
backed. They will have some enemies and move home in order to increase their prosperity. But inherited wealth will be squandered,
mostly after two or four generations. The local tombs will be reddish yellow and face north-west. They will be proud, overbearing and
experience few joys however much they try. They will skilfully assess the inherited wealth of others, but bring harm to their own fathers
and uncles. Afflictions will come due to bewitchers ('gong-po), lifelong companion gods ('go) and king spirits.
Kham trigram
Those whose birth coincides with the Kham trigram will have paternal ancestors who had fallen into the grasp of another, or who had an
illegitimate child, or a sibling bringing an end to the family line. They will be despised on account of their black-coloured property, while
their fathers' reputation will be outweighed by those of their siblings, and there will be a history of divorce. Nonetheless the family line
will flourish for four or five generations. The local tombs will be grey and face north or east. Sufferings will be instantly reversed but the
subject's poignantly evil heart will find it hard to generate concord. Inwardly bewildered, though outwardly calm, such natives will be
aloof and independent. They will have sons, the presiding deity will be Klu-btsan dkar-ma, and afflictions will come due to imprecatory
goddesses (ma-mo), lifelong companion gods ('go) and attachment spirits (bsen-mo).
Gin trigram
Those whose birth coincides with the Gin trigram will have paternal ancestors who died of leprosy or plague, or who were afflicted by
pollution and died accidentally due to the negative spirits present when a stove is overboiled. Alternatively, their families may have had
two or three generations who were educated Buddhist monks or Bon priests. The local tombs will face the north or east. They will be
heavily built, taciturn and steadfast in word, and if male, there will be a single father with a single son – one of them being slim and
refined, and the other obese and coarse. The presiding deity will be dGra-lha drag-po and it is said that afflictions will be due to spirit
lords of the soil, including gShin-rje 'go.
Zin trigram
Those whose birth coincides with the Zin trigram will have paternal ancestors whose family line has been interrupted. They will be sus-
tained by blood feuds, and incur many injuries due to the plague-causing spirits (gnyan) who frequent trees. Yet they will survive for one
or three generations in a hostile environment. The local tombs will be green or blue, and face south-east. They will come to possess chil-
dren and wealth, despite their rough speech and domestic losses. The presiding deity will be Klu-bdud yul-bdag 'go, and there will be
afflictions due to demons who haunt the foundations of buildings.
Zon trigram
Those whose birth coincides with the Zon trigram will have paternal ancestors who angered their teachers, or provoked the demons
of imprecation (rbad-'dre). They will have died accidentally or through madness or suicide on account of the afflictions of the
serpentine spirits and the spirit lords of the soil; and they may have died abroad. Though the paternal ancestors may have numbered
two or four, now the family will be extremely isolated. The local tombs will face inland towards the south-east or south. Though partial to
base desires, they will be imbued with a keen sense of equanimity and spirit of rivalry; and they will greatly esteem both mental and phys-
ical activities, eventually dying due to sudden ailments. Afflictions will also come due to sman-'g0,37 king spirits and bewitchers ('gong-po).



158
The White Beryl
Prognostications concerning the natal numeric squares (White Beryl, ff. 182a-186b)
Even more detailed readings are given for the natal numeric squares. For example, those whose birth coincides with White One (gcig-
dkar) will be children blessed by the gods (deva). There will be but a single descendent, who strives to work for the sake of others. If male,
he will have a broad stature; and if female she will be well-proportioned. The household will be self-sufficient, and the subject will be fond
of male children. Yet the subject's perception will be consumed by king spirits, malign goblins (the'u-brang) and bewitchers. In particular
there will be the risk of bewitchers ingressing into the heart. The presiding deity will be Klu-lcam dkar-mo 'go. In this sector of White
One it will be hard to raise children, and the subject's own children may be raised by another outside the family. Lameness, arthritis, defec-
tive vision and ailments of the upper body, nose, eyes and ears may arise in consequence of someone falling over a precipice. The subject
will have strong dislikes, an unstable mind, and a tendency to squander wealth. There may well be divorce in the home, or the need to raise
two children. The family line will be passed on by a single person for three generations. Short-tempered but pure-hearted, the subject will
endure great ups and downs in early life, undergoing tribulations, but will become happier in later life. In the immediately preceding lives,
the subject will have been born as a king in the human world and then as a god. The subject may have moles on the waist, the right side or
the right shoulder, or else have distinguishing physical marks on the left arm or the lower part of the body. The average lifespan will be
seventy-one years and there will be four life-threatening obstacles. Delighting in ablution and cleanliness, the subject will nonetheless be
overwhelmed by impurities. In childhood he or she may be orphaned and prone to infirmity, while the father or grandfather may die
abroad, or else the skull will be fractured, and there will be breathlessness. The subject will encounter wealth of mixed fortune, and in the
next life it is said that he or she may be born as a goat, sheep, bird, mountain spirit (yaksa) or serpentine spirit (nāga). However, if an image
of Avalokiteśvara is constructed, he or she may be born in the next life as a wealthy man, or as a god, or a member of the Brahmin class.
Prognostications concerning lifespan, physique, wealth and reputation (White Beryl, ff. 1866–187b)
This topic is known by the collective name ‘divine glory, lifespan and demon prognosis' (lha-dpal tshe-bdud), but it actually contains five
graded prognostications which can be made concerning the lifespan, physique, wealth and reputation of a child, based on the relationship
of the child's elements to the mother's natal trigram or numeric square. Respectively and in declining order, these prognostications are
known as divine parentage' (pha-ma lha), ‘glorious offspring' (bu-tsha dpal), 'harmonious lifespan' (mthun-pa tshe), ‘potent spiriť (thub-pa
'dre) and “impotent demon' (mi-thub bdud). Lo-chen Dharmaśrī's summary of this topic in Moonbeams (f. 23 a/b) accords with the chart
outlined on Plate 3, fig. 5.
༡
སྲོག་པ་མ་ལྷ།
།
བ་ཚེ་དཔལ།
མཐུན་པ་ཚེ་
ཐུབ་པ་འདྲ།
མ་ཐུབ་བདུད་
བཞུཕ་མ་ལྷོ།
ས
བུ་ཙ་དཔལ།
མཐུན་པ་ཚེ་
ཐུབ་པ་འདེ། །
མི་ཐུབ་བདུད། །
ལྷ་དཔལ་ཚེ་བདུད་རྩི་བའི་མའི་སྤར་ཁ་བསྟན། །
༄༅ ལྷ་དཔལ་ཚེ་བདུད་བརྩི་བའི་སྐྱེ་བ་བསྟན།
ཚེའི་ཉི་མ་འཆར་ལེ་བདུན་ཅུ་བརྒྱལ། །
༄༅ ཉིམ་སྨན་ཕྲལ་དྲུག་ཅུ་རྩ་གཅིག་ཐུབ། །
ཉི་མརར་བསྐྱོར་ཚི་སྣའི་འབྲིང་བཞི་བཅུ་ཞེ་དགུ་འ༨འ།
ཉི་མ་རླན་སླབ་གསུམ་ཅུ་རྩ་བདུན་མ་བརྒལ།།
༈ཚེསལ་ཆུ་བ་བཙས་མ་ཐག་ལ་འདྲི།
༄༅།གཟུགས་བཟང་ལ་བྱང་བཞིན་ལེགས་མས་ཤིང
༄༅།ལུས་སྐལ་རྒྱུས་ཆུང་ངུས་གསེས་ཉམས་ཤིང་བདེ། །
།ལས་སྐལ་ཁྲིང་གཟུགས་བཟང་ཁྱདབཞིནལེགས་ངངལུས་རང་གི་ལ་
P། ལུས་སྐལཕམཆུང་ངས་གས་དགའནཚམེད། །
༄༅།ལུས་སྐལ་ཆད་ལྗོན་ཤིང་ཆུག་སྟེ་གཟུགས་ངན་གཅོང་གིས་ཟིན།
༄༅།སྐལ་བ་ལྷག་མཚོ་རྒྱས་བུ་ནོར་ལྡན་བྲན་འཁོང་གྲགས་པ་ཡིན།
༡།དབང་སྐལས་བུ་བཟང་ནོར་འབྲིང་གཡང་རློན་ལ་འབད། །
༄༅།ཟས་ནོར་གྱི་སྐལ་བའཕྲིང་ནོར་བཟང་བུ་འབྲིང་ཡལ་བསྐྱེད་དང་སྲིད་ཕུར་ཐོགས།
བྱ་དབང་སྐལ་དམན་བུ་སྡུག་ཚང་དངནོར་ལགང་སངས་ཚད་
ལྟ་ཆད་ཀྱི་མཚོསྐམས་བུ་བདུན་བས་ཀྱང་མཐའ་རབས་རང་
སུ་ཡིག་ཚཐོབ་ལམ་ས་འདྲ་
ངསྐལ་ལྷག་བསམ་དག་འགྲུབ་པ་
ཀླུང་སྐལ་རྒྱས་མི་ཁ་བྱམས།
ཀླུང་སྐལ་འབྲིང་ཐབ་དང་ཡིག་ཚང་ཐོབ་ཐར་ལམ་སྣ་འདྲེན།
བཀླུང་སྐལ་ལ་ལམ་བྱས་པས་འགུག་འཕྱི་བྱམས་ནང་མི་སྤང་།
པ་ཀླུང་སྐལ་ཆད་སྐྱིད་སྡུག་མང་དོན་མི་འགྲུབ་མི་ཁ་ལྡང་བས་ངན།
དབང་ཉིད་ཕ་མ།
པུ་ཚདཔལ།
མཐུན་པ་ཆེས་
ཐུབ་པ་འདྲ།
མི་ཐུབ་བདུད།
KAKATA
ཀླུང་རྟ་ཕ་མ།
བུ་ཚེ་དཔལ།
སོགས་དབང་
སྐབས་
ཐུབ་པ་འདྲ།
མི་ཐུབ་བདུད།
།
Plate 3, fig. 5



159
Divinations of natal horoscope
Plate 3, fig. 5 (Ms I:ff. 13-15): Prognostications concerning the five qualities of lifespan, physique, family wealth and reputation
Trigram
Zin
Li
Khon
Dva
Kham
mother's trigram indicating portents of 'divine parentage', glorious offspring', 'harmonious lifespan',
['potent spirit") and impotent demon' (Iha-dpal tshe bdud-rtsi-ba'i ma'i spar-kha bstan)
(mother's] numeric square indicating portents of 'divine parentage', 'glorious offspring', 'harmonious
Numeric square
Green 4
Red 9/7
Yellow 5
White 1/6/8
Black 2; Blue 3
lifespan', ['potent spirit') and impotent demon' (Iha-dpal tshe bdud-rtsi-ba'i sme-ba bstan)
lifespan 'like sunrise', exceeding 73 years
Vitality element indicating 'divine parentage'
horse; snake
ox; dragon; sheep; dog
bird; monkey
mouse; pig
tiger; hare
(tshe'i nyi-ma 'char-lo bdun-cu rtsa-gsum brga)
mouse; pig
tiger; hare
horse; snake
ox; dragon; sheep; dog
bird; monkey
lifespan of 61 years, like an 'unclouded sun'
(nyi-ma sprin-bral drug-cu rtsa-gcig thub)
tiger; hare
horse; snake
ox; dragon; sheep; dog
bird; monkey
mouse; pig
(srog pha-ma Iha)
Vitality element indicating ‘glorious offspring'
(bu-tsha dpa)
Vitality element indicating ‘harmonious lifespan
(mthun-pa tshe)
Vitality element indicating 'potent spirit'
(thub-pa 'dre)
Vitality element indicating 'impotent demon'
(mi-thub bdud)
average lifespan: one exceeding 46 years, like the sun on a windswept day
(nyi-ma rlung bskyong tshe skal 'bring bzhi bcu zhe-drug 'da')
lifespan not exceeding 37 years, like an 'overcast sun'
(nyi-ma sprin-sgrib gsum-cu rtsa-bdun mi-brga)
bird; monkey
mouse; pig
tiger; hare
horse; snake
ox; dragon; sheep; dog
ox; dragon; sheep; dog
bird; monkey
mouse; pig
tiger; hare
horse; snake
lifespan of little fortune: one indicated by post-natal death
(tshe-skal chung-ba btsas ma-thag-la 'chi)
2
Body element indicating 'divine parentage'
fire
earth
iron
water
wood
water
wood
fire
earth
iron
wood
fire
earth
iron
water
physique of lifelong beauty, fine complexion and demeanour
(tshe-gzugs bzang-la byad-bzhin legs-ste nyams-shed)
physique of good fortune: one easy to raise in childhood, and endowed with a pleasant demeanour
(lus-skal rgyas chung-dus gso-sla nyams-shed bde)
physique of average fortune: one of beauty, fine complexion and natural poise
(lus-skal 'bring gzugs-bzang byad-bzhin legs rang-lus rang-gi khyab)
physique of low fortune: one hard to raise in childhood and prone to ill-health
(lus-skal 'pham chung-dus gso-dka' na-tsha mod)
physique without fortune: one like a severed tree, ugly and consumed by chronic diseases
(lus-skal chad ljon-shing chag-ste gzugs-ngan gcong-gis zin)
destiny of superior fortune: one like a vast lake, endowed with children, wealth and stout retainers
iron
water
wood
fire
earth
earth
iron
water
wood
fire
3
fire
earth
iron
water
wood
(skal-ba lhag mtsho-rgyas bu-nor-Idan bran-'khor hrags-pa yin)
(lus pha-ma lha)
Body element indicating ‘glorious offspring'
(bu-tsha dpa)
Body element indicating 'harmonious lifespan'
(mthun-pa tshe)
Body element indicating 'potent spirit'
(thub-pa 'dre)
Body element indicating 'impotent demon'
(mi-thub bdud)
Destiny element indicating ‘divine parentage'
(dbang-thang pha-ma Iha)
Destiny element indicating 'glorious offspring'
(bu-tsha dpa)
Destiny element indicating 'harmonious lifespan
(mthun-pa tshe)
Destiny element indicating potent spirit
(thub-pa 'dre)
Destiny element indicating 'impotent demon'
(mi-thub bdud)
Luck element indicating ‘divine parentage'
(klung-rta pha-ma Iha)
Luck element indicating ‘glorious offspring'
water
wood
fire
earth
iron
destiny of good fortune: one with excellent children, average wealth and persistent good tidings
(bang-skal rgyas bu-bzang nor-'bring gYang rlon-la 'bad)
destiny of average fortune: one with wealth, average children, and prosperity, capable of maintaining a
secure line of descent (zas-nor-gyi skal-ba 'bring nor-bzang bu-'bring dpal-bskyed-dang srid-phur thogs)
wood
fire
earth
iron
water
iron
water
wood
fire
earth
destiny of low fortune: one with children who might break the family line, constantly running out of money
(dbang-skal dman bu-tsha lhag-chad-dang nor-la gang stongs rgyun-mi-chad)
earth
iron
water
wood
fire
fire
earth
iron
water
wood
destiny without fortune: one like a dry lake, destitute, without family descendants, despite having seven children
(skal-chad-kyi mtsho-skams bu bdun btsas-kyang mtha' rabs chad-cing dbul
luck of highest reputation: an excellent leader, who achieves all higher aspirations and so forth
(vid-tshang thob lam sna-'dren klung-skal lhag-bsam dgu 'grub-pa sogs bzang)
luck of good fortune: one whose reputation is fine
water
wood
fire
earth
iron
(bu-tsha dpa)
Luck element indicating 'harmonious lifespan'
wood
fire
earth
iron
water
(klung-skal rgyas mi-kha byams)
luck of average fortune: one acquiring skill and reputation, leading beings on the path to liberation
(klung-skal 'bring-thab-dang yig-tshang thob thar-lam sna-'dren)
luck of low fortune: one whose actions are hard to respect, the subject of outside gossip and domestic quarrels
(klung-skal 'pham byas-pas 'gu-dka' phyi-byams nang mi-sdang)
iron
water
wood
fire
(mthun-pa tshe)
Luck element indicating 'potent spirit'
(thub-pa 'dre)
Luck element indicating 'impotent demon'
(mi-thub bdud)
earth
earth
iron
water
wood
fire
luck without fortune: one experiencing many joys and sorrows, but unsuccessful and inauspicious on account
of being the subject of flagrant gossip (klung-skal chad skyid-sdug mang don-mi 'grub mi-kha Idang-bas ngan)
Then, concerning the prognoses called 'divine glory, spirits and demons'. 38
Pebbles are distinctly arranged,
Marking the contrast between the child's vitality,
body, destiny and luck elements
And the [mother's) own natal trigram and numeric square.
If these form a mother-relationship,
Now, when these five successive prognostications are made in respect of the vitality element of the child, they will respectively portend a
lifespan exceeding seventy-three years, sixty-one years, forty-six years, thirty-seven years and post-natal death.44 When they are made
against the body element of the child, they respectively portend the best physique, an excellent physique, a self-sustaining physique, a
frail physique, and a consumptive physique. 45 When they are made against the destiny element of the child, they respectively portend
enormous wealth, prosperity, moderate wealth, meagre resources, and destitution associated with the ending of the family line.46Lastly,
when they are made against the luck element of the child, they respectively portend the highest reputation, good reputation, well-earned
reputation, poor reputation, and scandalous reputation.47
If the prognoses concerning the vitality and luck elements are both inauspicious, the lifespan will certainly be
short; if those concerning the body and luck elements are both inauspicious, there will be much illness and suffering in old age; whereas if
those concerning the destiny and luck elements are both inauspicious, one's children will be poor and the family line will end. 48 The vari-
ous predictions can be made against the mother's natal trigram or numeric square. Generally speaking eight pebbles will be deployed if
both the natal trigram and numeric square are utilised, as shown in chart 4.10 (based on a chart from the sMan-rtsis-khang in Lhasa).
The prediction will be one of divine parentage', 39
If they form a son-relationship,
The prediction will be one of 'glorious offspring', 40
If they form a friend-relationship,
The prediction will be one of 'potent spirit', 41
If they form an enemy-relationship,
The prediction will be one of 'impotent demon', 42
And if they form an identity-relationship,
The prediction will be one of 'harmonious life' 48



160
The White Beryl
4.10 Exemplary chart
Divination of divine parentage', 'glorious offspring', ['harmonious lifespan'], 'potent spirit
and 'impotent demon' (lha-dpal 'dre-bdud) based on mother's natal trigram Gin
Child's vitality: earth
'harmonious lifespan' (mthun-pa tshe)
0
Child's body: earth
'harmonious lifespan' (mthun-pa tshe)
0
Child's destiny: fire
'glorious offspring' (bu-tsha dpa)
ОХ
Child's luck: wood
'potent spirit' (thub-pa 'dre)
00
ОХ
Divination of 'divine parentage', 'glorious offspring', ['harmonious lifespan'], 'potent spirit
and 'impotent demon' (Iha-dpal 'dre-bdud, based on mother's natal numeric square White 6
Child's vitality: earth
glorious offspring' (bu-tsha dpa)
Child's body: earth
"glorious offspring' (bu-tsha dpa)
ОХ
Child's destiny: fire
'potent spirit' (thub-pa 'dre)
00
Child's luck: wood
'impotent demon' (mi-thub bdud)
XX
Prognostications concerning prosperity and misfortune
Prosperity and misfortune can also be predicted by contrasting the child's vitality and luck elements with those of the child's father, or
the child's body and destiny elements with those of the mother. Five prognostications can consequently be made, namely: 'prosperity'
(dpal-babs), ‘misfortune' (byur-babs), ‘status quo' (rang-rkang), “loss of complexion' (mdangs-shor) and 'lifetime extension' (tshe-len). So Lo-
chen asserts (Moonbeams, f. 23b):
Alternatively, prosperity and so forth may be examined:
Likewise, if they form an enemy-relationship,
There are four pebbles, marking the contrast between
The prediction will conform to the '[five] misfortunes', 50
the vitality and luck elements of a child
If they form an identity-relationship,
and the vitality and luck elements of the father;
The prediction will conform to the 'five status quo,'51
Or between the body and destiny elements [of a child]
If they form a son-relationship,
and those of the mother.
If these form a mother-relationship,
The prediction will conform to the five 'losses of complexion', 52
And if they form a friend-relationship,
The prediction will conform to the five lifetime extensions'. 53
The prediction will conform to the 'five prosperities', 49
In White Beryl, ff. 1875–188b, the various readings based on these predictions are enumerated. For each of the five categories - prosper-
ity, misfortune, status quo, loss of complexion and lifetime extension – four distinct readings are given, corresponding to the father's
vitality and luck elements and the mother's body and destiny elements. For example, 'loss of complexion' in relation to the vitality ele-
ment portends a short lifespan, in relation to the body element it portends ill-health, in relation to the destiny element it portends scant
food and material wealth, and in relation to the luck element it portends the flaring up of rumours. 'Lifespan extension’in relation to the
vitality element portends an average lifespan, in relation to the body element it portends rare diseases, in relation to the destiny element
it portends an abundance of food and material wealth, and in relation to the luck element it portends containment of rumours. Four peb-
bles are deployed, as in chart 4.11.
4.11 Exemplary chart
Divination of prosperity and misfortune (dpal-byur brtag-pa)
Basis of the contrast
Prediction
Pebble
father's vitality: earth
vitality: earth
misfortune (byur-babs)
XX
mother's body: earth
body: water
0x
mother's destiny: iron
destiny: iron
loss of complexion (mdangs-shor)
loss of complexion (mdangs-shon
status quo (rang-rkang)
ОХ
father's luck: fire
luck: fire
Prognostications concerning the weight of past actions (rgya-ma las-grub rtsis, White Beryl, ff. 1886–196a)
Past actions (karma) carry weight into the present life. On analysis, these may be categorised according to three types: (1) ascending, vir-
tuous or upwardly mobile' (gyen-'phar) past actions; (2) descending, non-virtuous, or “decadent (thur-babs) past actions: and (3) horizon-
tal, neutral or ‘upwardly aspiring' (gyen-lta) past actions. As expounded in White Beryl (ff. 1886–196a), these three calculations are made
to determine the prospects for a newly born child of a given natal year-sign in relation to the father's natal year-sign. To this end, the
father's twelve sectors of growth and decline54 are juxtaposed with the cycle of the twelve year-signs, commencing with the father's natal
year-sign. The ‘upwardly mobile' calculation is made in an anti-clockwise direction, starting from the father's sector of foetus; the ‘deca-
dent calculation is made in a clockwise direction, starting from the father's sector of conception; and the ‘upwardly aspiring calculation
is made in a clockwise direction, starting from the father's sector of birth. It should then be determined which of the father's twelve sec-
tors of growth and decline coincide with the child's onerous sectors of ill-health, death, weak tomb-sign (dur-chung),55 and adversarial
tomb-sign (dur-gshed), which in this context are known respectively by the technical terms: tshoms, stongs, sdong and kha-ral.
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī adds that when the calculation suggests a coincidence with the father's sectors of ablution,
birth, growth and work, the prediction will correspond respectively to the child's sectors of ill-health, death, weak tomb-sign and adver-
sarial tomb-sign in the ‘upwardly mobile' chart. Similarly, when the calculation coincides with the father's sectors of conception, embryo,
foetus and decline, the prediction will correspond respectively to the child's sectors of ill-health, death, weak tomb-sign and adversarial
tomb-sign in the ‘upwardly aspiring' chart. Lastly, if the calculation coincides with the father's sectors of ill-health, death, adversarial
tomb-sign57 and tomb, the prediction will correspond respectively to the child's sectors of ill-health, death, weak tomb-sign and adver-
sarial tomb-sign in the decadent' chart. For example (Plate 3, fig. 6; see p. 162), in the case of the ‘decadent' chart, when a father is born in
the horse or snake year and has a child born in the monkey year, the calculation will coincide with the father's sector of ill-health, corre-
sponding to the child's sector of ill-health (tshoms), whereas if his child is born in the bird year it will coincide with the father's sector of
death, corresponding to the child's sector of death (stongs). However, if the child is born in the dragon year the calculation will coincide
Opposite Detail of Plate 16, fig. 8 (see p. 189), showing
with the father's sector of tomb, corresponding to the child's sector of the weak tomb-sign (sdong), and if the child is born in the dog year,
prognostications concerning model children of the average type
it will coincide with the father's adversarial tomb-sign, corresponding to the child's own adversarial tomb-sign (kha-ral).



162
The White Beryl
Various predictions can then be made, such as the negative impact of not having prepared a natal horoscope, the odd or even ages at
which the child is susceptible to ill-health, the ages at which a child's development is naturally healthy, the mother's expertise in raising
the child taking this information into account, the years during which a child is susceptible to death, and the ritual charms (gto) in the
form of gtor-ma offerings which are made to avert these and enable the lifespan to increase, as expounded in the Gathering of All Secrets
(gSang-ba kun-'dus).
bird; monkey
mouse; pig
O X
sheep
dog
dragon
Predictions
Plate 3, fig. 6 (Ms l: ff. 13-15): Prognostications concerning the weight of past actions
1. Calculation of the ascending for 'upwardly mobile'] weight of past actions (rgya-ma gyen)
Father's natal year (pha-mes lo)
horse; snake tiger; hare
Child's natal year corresponding to the weight of ill-health hare
mouse
(rgya-ma tshoms)
Child's natal year corresponding to the weight of death tiger pig
horse
bird
bird
bird
bird
bird
charm (gto) of the Gathering of All Secrets to be made on account of ill-health in the ascending chart
(rgya-ma gyen-du tshoms-pas gto-gsang-ba kun 'dus-bya)
snake
monkey
monkey
monkey
monkey
monkey
charm (gto) of Nine Swift Circles to be made, on account of the luck sector of death in the ascending chart being
(rgya-ma stongs)
Child's natal year corresponding to the weight of weak
tomb-sign (rgya-ma sdong)
sheep
dragon
dog
OX
ОХ
OX
OX
transferred to a girl (rgya-gyen stongs-pa'i klung bu-mor 'gro! 'khor-lo dgu mgyogs-kyi gto-bya)
charm (gto) of the Spirit Lord gYul-'khrug to be made to avoid death and avert the dwindling of existence, and ending
of the family line, on account of the weak tomb-sign in the ascending chart (rgya-ma gyen sdod-pa'i srid-skams
skye-sgab-chadl bzlog-pa-dang shi-kha bye'ol sa-bdag gyul-'khrug gto-btang)
charm (gto) of the Five Swift Circles to be made on account of the adversarial tomb-sign in the ascendant chart indicating
ox
dog
dragon
Child's natal year corresponding to the weight of
adversarial tomb-sign (rgya-ma kha-ra)
sheep
sheep
sheep
sheep
sheep
that the recurrence of death is not cut off (rgya-ma gyen kha-ral shi-sgab mi-chod 'khor-lo Inga mgyogs-kyi gto-btang
2. Calculation of the descending for decadent'] weight of past actions (rgya-ma thur)
Father's natal year (pha-mes lo)
horse; snake
Child's natal year corresponding to the weight of ill-health monkey
tiger; hare
bird; monkey
mouse; pig
o x
sheep
d
og
dragon
Predictions
snake
pig
tiger
tiger
tiger
tiger
tiger
charm (gto) of the Gathering of All Secrets to be made on account of obstructive ill-health in the descending
(rgya-ma tshoms)
chart (rgya-ma thur-du tshom-bas mi-'phel gto gsang-ba kun-'dus-bya)
Child's natal year corresponding to the weight of death
bird
h
orse
mouse
hare
hare
hare
hare
hare
(rgya-ma stongs)
Child's natal year corresponding to the weight of weak
tomb-sign (rgya-ma sdong)
dragon
Ox
sheep
d og
dog
dog
dog
dog
charm (gto) of Nine Swift Circles to be made on account of the luck sector of death in the descending
chart being transferred to a girl (rgya-thurstongs-pa'i klung bu-mor 'gro 'khor-lo dgu mgyogs-kyi gto bya)
charm (gto) of the Spirit Lord gyul-'khrug to be made to avoid death and avert the dwindling of
existence, and cutting of the family line, on account of the weak tomb-sign in the descending chart (rgya-ma
thur sdod-pa'i srid-skams skye-sgab-chadl bzlog-pa-dang shi-kha bya'ol sa-bdag gyul-'khrug gto-btang)
charm (gto) of the Five Swift Circles to be made on account of the adversarial tomb-sign in the descendent chart indicating
that the recurrence of death is not cut off (rgya-ma thur kha-ral shi-sgab mi-chod 'khor-lo Inga mgyogs-kyi gto btang)
dog
sheep
ox
dragon
dragon
dragon
dragon
dragon
Child's natal year corresponding to the weight of
adversarial tomb-sign (rgya-ma kha-ra)
3. Calculation of the horizontal (or 'upwardly aspiring') weight of past actions (rgya-ma phred)
tiger; hare
bird; monkey
mouse; pig
ОХ
sheep
dog
dragon
Predictions
monkey
tiger
snake
snake
snake
snake
snake
charm (gto) of the Gathering of All Secrets to be made on account of obstructive ill-health in the horizontal chart
Father's natal year (pha-mes lo)
horse; snake
Child's natal year corresponding to the weight of ill-health pig
(rgya-ma tshoms)
Child's natal year corresponding to the weight of death mouse
bird
hare
horse
horse
horse
horse
horse
(rgya-ma phred tshoms-pas mi-'phel gto gsang-ba kun 'dus-bya)
charm (gto) of Nine Swift Circles to be made on account of the luck sector of death in the horizontal chart being transferred
to a girl (rgya-ma phred stongs-pa'i klung bu-mor 'gro 'khor-lo dgu mgyogs-kyi gto btang)
charm (gto) of the Spirit Lord gyul-'khrug to be made to avoid death and avert the dwindling of existence, and cutting off
(rgya-ma stongs)
Child's natal year corresponding to the weight of weak
tomb-sign (rgya-ma sdong) 58
sheep
dragon
dog
ОХ
of the family line, on account of the weak tomb-sign in the horizontal chart (rgya-ma phred sdod-pa'i srid-skams
skye-sgab-chad bzlog-pa-dang shi-kha bye'ol sa-bdag gyul-'khrug gto btang)
ОХ
dog
dragon
sheep
sheep
sheep
sheep
sheep
charm (gto) of the Five Swift Circles to be made on account of the adversarial tomb-sign in the horizontal chart indicating
Child's natal year corresponding to the weight of
adversarial tomb-sign (rgya-ma kha-ra)
that the recurrence of death is not cut off (rgya-ma phred kha-ral shi-sgab mi-chod 'khor-lo Inga mgyogs-kyi gto btang)
When these calculations are actually made, twelve pebbles are employed, as indicated in model chart 4.12.
4.12 Exemplary chart
Divination of the weight of past actions based on calculating the father's luck
"Upwardly mobile' past action (gyen-'phar) ill-health (tshoms)
death (stongs)
weak tomb-sign (sdong)
adversarial tomb-sign (kha-ra)
ill-health (tshoms)
"Upwardly aspiring' past action (gyen-Ita)
death (stongs)
weak tomb-sign (sdong)
adversarial tomb-sign (kha-ra)
"Decadent' past action (thur-babs)
ill-health (tshoms)
death (stongs)
weak tomb-sign (sdong
adversarial tomb-sign (kha-ra)
0



163
_Divinations of natal horoscope
ཕ་མེས་གོ་
རྒྱ་མ་ཚོམ།
རྒྱ་མ་སྟེ་
རྒྱ་མ་སྡོད།
བརྒྱམ་གྱེན་དུ་ཚེན་བའི་་གཏོགསང་བ་ཀུན་འདུ
ལྟ།རྒྱམ་གྱིན་སྡུས་པའི་ཀླུང་བུམོང་འགྲོ་འཁོར་ལོ་དབམགྱོ་༧གཏོ་བྱ།
PIESTA VIOS
| གཡུལ་འཁྲུག་གཏི་བཏུང་།་
༄༅།ཚམ་གྱམཁ་ཕལ་ཤི་སྒབ་མཆོད་འཁོར་ལོ་ལྔ་མགྱོགས་ཀྱི་གཏོ་བཏང༌།
མ《
བ་དངཤིབབྷ
རྒྱ་མ་ཁ་རལ།
ཕ་མེས་ལ།
རྒྱམ་ཚོམས།
༄༅།ཚམ་ཐུང་ངམ་བས་མི་འཕེལ་གཏོགས་ངོབ་ཀུན་འདུས་བྱ།
E།རྒྱམ་ཐུར་སྟེངས་པའིགླུང་བུམོར་འགྲོ་འཁོར་ལ་དགམགྱོགས་ཀྱི་གཏེ་བྱ།
བརD)ནས།
རྒྱམ་སོད།
ཐོས་བག་
།ཚོམ་བུར་སྐྱེད་པའི་སྲིང་སྐམས་སུ་སླབ་ཚཔའ
གཡུལ་འཁྲུག་གཏོ་བཏང༌།
༄༅།རྒྱམ་ཐུང་ཁ་རལའི་སྒབ་མི་ཚོད་འཁོར་ལོ་ལྔ་མགྱོགས་ཀྱི་གཏོ་
རྒྱ་མོ་ཁ་རལ།
o
རྒྱ་མ་ཚོམས།
Ko
རྒྱུ་མ་སྟེ།
།རྒྱམ་ཕྲེང་ཆོམ་པས་མི་འཕེལ་ལྟེ་གསང་བ་ཀུན་འདུས་བྱ། །
།སྤྲུམ་ཕྲེང་སྟོངས་པའི་ཀླུ་པབུ་མེར་འགྲོ་ལ་ལེ་ལེ་དགུ་མགྱེལ་ཀྱི་གཏེ་བཏཔ།
བརླག་ཕྲེདསྲེད་པ་སྲིང་ཙམ་སྐྱེ་སྒྲུབ་ཚང་བཟློག་པ་དང་ཤི་ཁ་བྱའི་ས་བདག་
གཡུལ་འཁྲུག་གཏོ་བཏང་། །
སྣ།རྒྱམ་ཕྲ་ཁ་རལ་ནི་སྒབ་མ་ཚོང་འཁོར་ལ་ལྗམགྱོལ་ཀྱི་གཏོ་བཏང༌། །
རྒྱ་མ་ལྡོག་པ།
རྣམ་ཁ་རལ།
Plate3, fig.6
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises this topic as follows (Moonbeams, f. 24b):
Then, as for the luck aspects pertaining to the weight [of past actions):59
There are three types: 'upwardly mobile', 60 'upwardly aspiring 61 and 'decadent'. 62
Secondly, as for the horizontal (or 'upwardly aspiring') computational chart:
The [father's] sectors of conception, foetus, embryo and decline
Respectively coincide with [the child's] sectors
The parents' [twelve] sectors of growth and decline
Are counted through to the one coinciding with the year-sign of the child,
And the [child's] vitality element is then taken into account.63
of ill-health, death, weak tomb-sign, and adversarial tomb-sign.
Thirdly, as for the inauspicious or 'decadent' computational chart:
The [father's] sectors of ill-health, death, funeral and tomb
Respectively coincide with [the child's] sectors
Firstly, as for the 'upwardly mobile' computational chart:
The [father's] sectors of ablution, birth, growth and work
Respectively coincide with [the child's] sectors
of ill-health (tshoms), death (stongs), 64 weak tomb-sign (sdong 65
and adversarial tomb-sign (kha-ra).
of ill-health, death, weak tomb-sign and adversarial tomb-sign. 66
Prognostications concerning the impact of the father's trigram and coincidental actions on childbirth (spar-brgyad rgya-ma, White Beryl, ff. 196a-197b)
There are certain actions coinciding with the birth of a child (bya-las-dang mthun-par bu-tsha btsas-pa) and the current trigram of the
father (pha-mes babs-spar) which provoke negative consequences ('bras-bu). These and the rites by which they may be averted are
described in White Beryl, ff. 196a-197b, and illustrated on Plate 4, fig. 5.
For example, it is said that if the father's current trigram is Li (fire) and twin girls are born, they will resemble a
wingless or featherless bird. In particular, if the father, brothers and sisters all gather at the time of that birth, and the children are born
in a horse or snake year, the impact limits the age of the children (rgya-ma 'thems). Consequently, one twin will live and the other will die;
and the vigilant demons will inflict harm, as if seizing a bird by its feathers. To avoid this outcome, various charms (gto) should be made
and specific rites performed.
Similarly, if the father's current trigram is Khon (earth), and a child is born during a sheep year, while people are
quarrelling and the father-in-law is also present, the impact can be fatal (rgya-ma sdod), and the vigilant demons will launch an unavoid-
able assault, as if one were unable to escape across a wide river. To avoid this outcome, a five-storied stūpa should be constructed, along
with charms (gto), and so forth.
If the father's current trigram is Dva (iron), and a child is born during a bird or monkey year, coinciding with a
blood feud or the gathering of murderous weapons, the impact will provoke ill-health (rgya-ma tshoms). The offspring will be girls, there
will be a blood feud likened to rusting iron, and harm reminiscent of tarnished gold will be inflicted by the vigilant demons. To remedy
this, various charms (gto) should be made and specific rituals performed.



164
The White Beryl
If the father's current trigram is Khen (space), and an oath is sworn, particularly by one born in an iron dog year, it is said that the family
line will be impeded and the impact will turn growth into decline (rgya-ma ldog). Vigilant demons will inflict their harm by a process of
attrition, like the hem of a dress being worn down. Consequently, various rites should be performed and charms (gto) should be made.
If the father's current trigram is Kham (water), and a child is born out of wedlock or through incest, particularly
when another household member has reached a mother-relationship year (ma-lo), the impact is terrifying (rgya-ma 'jig-pa). Fathers and
brothers will crush each other, and the bastard child will be called 'spear of darkness' (mun-nag mdung-thung). The vigilant demons will
inflict their harm, as if one were pierced by a sharp spear in a dungeon. Various counteracting rites should therefore be performed.
If the father's current trigram is Gin (mountain), and the birth coincides with the scattering of bones, particularly
those of a monk born in an ox year, the impact will be one which delimits the age (rgya-ma 'thengs), while ancestor spirits (mtshun) and sub-
terranean ogres will diminish wealth and property. To avoid this outcome various specified rites should be performed.
If the father's current trigram is Zin (wood), and a daughter is born, the impact is one of frailty (rgya-ma zhud)
because there will be no basis for continuity of the family line. Various rites should therefore be performed to avoid this circumstance.
Lastly, if the father's current trigram is Zon (air), and cooking pots are burnt or boil over at the time of a child's
birth, the impact will be obscuring (rgya-ma 'grib-pa). The glory of a brother will be transferred to a sister; while the vigilant demons will
provoke leprosy. To counteract this outcome various specified rites should be performed.
ཡཞེས་
བབས་སར།
7
TUR
བྱ་ལས་
UNLUKLIOLI
SA
ནར་བུཚོ
12
U
བཙསག།
V
WN WIE
131
JA
༧འབྲས་བུ་
Plate 4. fig. 5
Plate 4. fig. 5 (Ms I: ff. 16-19): Prognostications concerning the impact of the father's trigram and coincidental actions on childbirth
Khon.
Dva
Khen
Kham
Gin
Zin
Zon
If the father's trigram is as follows
(pha-mes babs-spar
and the following activity coincides with the birth
of the child (bya-las-dang mthun-par
child of horse or snake year,
child of sheep year, coinciding
birth of a daughter
childbirth coinciding with the
child of bird or monkey year,
coinciding with blood feuds
child whose birth coincides
with the false swearing of an
child born out of wedlock or
through incest, particularly
childbirth coincides with
the scattering of bones,
coinciding with the birth of
with quarrelling and the
burning or overboiling of
bu-tsha btsas-pa)
twin girls and the gathering
presence of father-in-law
or the gathering of
oath, particularly by one born
at a time when another
particularly those of a monk
cooking pots
of paternal relatives
murderous weapons
in an iron dog year
person has a year-sign in
born in an ox year
a mother-relationship
the predicted result will be as follows ('bras-bu)
impact turning growth into
terrifying impact (rgya-ma
impact delimiting the age
impact limiting the age of
children (rgya-ma 'thems), in
potentially fatal impact
(rgya-ma sdod). The vigilant
impact provoking ill-health
(rgya-ma tshoms), in
decline (rgya-ma ldog), in
'jig-pa), in consequence of
(rgya-ma 'thengs), while
impact of frailty (rgya-ma
zhud) because there is no
basis for continuity of the
obscuring impact (rgya-ma
'grib-pa). The brother's glory
(ming-dpa) is transferred to a
consequence of which one
demons will launch an
consequence of which one's
consequence of which the
which fathers and brothers
ancestor spirits and
twin will live and the other will
unavoidable assault, as if
offspring will be girls, there
family line will be impeded,
will crush each other, and the
subterranean ogres diminish
family
sister; while the vigilant
die; and the vigilant demons
one were unable to escape
will be a blood feud likened
and vigilant demons will
bastard child will be called
wealth and property
demons provoke leprosy
will inflict harm, as if seizing
across a wide river
to rusting iron, and harm
'spear of darkness' (mun-nag
mdung-thung). The vigilant
a bird by its feathers
inflict their harm by a process
of attrition, like the hem of a
dress being worn down
reminiscent of tarnished
gold will be inflicted by the
demons will inflict their harm,
vigilant demons
as if one were pierced by a
sharp spear in a dungeon
Prognostications concerning triple planetary conjunctions (White Beryl, ff. 203b-205b)
Predictions concerning the direst circumstances and even premature death may be made by calculating the subject's luck aspect in rela-
tion to the four main planets: Mars, Saturn, Jupiter and Mercury. The calculations determine the different ‘triple conjunctions' (sum-
'dom) of destiny element, year-sign and trigram, which may coincide respectively with each of these four planets, and which vary in the
case of male and female subjects. These are also known as major planetary conjunctions (gza' che-ba). If the destiny element differs, and
only the year-sign and trigram coincide, the calculation is known as a lesser planetary conjunction (gza' chung-ba). The chart on Plate 4,
fig. 6, illustrates this mode of divination.
fire destiny element
earth destiny element
wood destiny element
water destiny element
Plate 4, fig. 6 (Ms I: ff. 16–19): Prognostications concerning planetary triple conjunctions
fire destiny element wood destiny element earth destiny element water destiny element
of male subject of male subject of male subject
of male subject
mouse; dragon; monkey bird; ox; snake
tiger; horse; dog pig; sheep; hare
Dva; Zin
Khen; Zon
Li; Kham
Khon; Gin
of female subject
of female subject
of female subject
of female subject
mouse; dragon; monkey
tiger; horse; dog
bird; ox; snake
pig; sheep; hare
Kham; Li
Dva; Zin
Khon; Gin
Khen; Zon
Triple Mars
Triple Jupiter
Triple Saturn
Triple Mercury
Triple Mars
Triple Saturn
Triple Jupiter
Triple Mercury



165
Divinations of natal horoscope
Plate 4, fig. 6
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises this topic as follows (Moonbeams, f. 24a):
Then, there is the calculation of luck in relation to the four planets:
A male subject may well die ſprematurely]
The same is true for a male or female subject
Born in a fire bird, dragon or monkey year,
The former under the trigram Dva or Zin,
If he is born in an earth tiger, horse or dog year
In conjunction with the trigram Li or Kham,
And the latter under the trigram Li or Kham,
This is called a 'Triple Saturn Conjunction'. 68
In which case it is called a 'Triple Mars Conjunction : 69
A female subject may do so if she is born
And also for male and female subjects born in a wood bird, ox or snake year,
In an earth tiger, horse or dog year,
In conjunction with the trigram Dva or Zin,
The former under the trigram Khen or Zon,
And the latter under the trigram Gin or Khon,
In which case it is called a 'Triple Jupiter Conjunction': 70
In which case it is also called a 'Triple Saturn Conjunction'.
And lastly for male and female subjects born in a water pig, sheep or hare year,
The former under the trigram Gin or Khon,
And the latter under the trigram Khen or Zon,
In which case it is called a 'Triple Mercury Conjunction 71
In White Beryl, ff. 203b-205b, predictions are made concerning the types of birth coincident with these triple conjunctions. For example,
those born under a triple Mars conjunction are said to have exhausted their human resources and wealth, as if their inner organs were
consumed by vermin. Though they will be happy in the latter part of their lives, malignant demons will take their toll, and they will even-
tually die due to accidental injury or fever. Similarly, in the face of a triple Jupiter conjunction, the foundations are shaken by demonic
spirits, in the face of a triple Saturn conjunction the various burial sites are disturbed, and in the face of a triple Mercury conjunction,
obstacles emerge as if leaked through a sieve. As for the basis of these calculations, Lo-chen Dharmaśrī states (Moonbeams, f. 24a):
It is said that since these calculations are made
On the basis of the mother's trigram,
The parents' year-signs, 72 and the subject's own year-sign.
This prediction is known as the 'Gathering of a Single Household'. 73
The actual divination then calculates the luck of the child based on the relationship between the outer, intermediate and inner planetary
aspects74 in positive and negative terms. Nine pebbles are employed altogether, the first three respectively representing the destiny ele-
ment of the outer planetary aspect, the vitality of the intermediate planetary aspect, and the constitutional type of the inner planetary
aspect. The remaining six pebbles represent the positive or friend- and negative or enemy-relationships formed between each of the first
three and the others. Model chart 4.13, using the example of a subject with an earth outer planetary aspect, a wood intermediate plane-
tary aspect, and an earth inner planetary aspect, will serve to clarify this point.
In the words of Lo-chen Dharmaśrī (Moonbeams, f. 24b):
Saturn
4.13 Exemplary chart
Divination of luck in relation to the planetary aspects
Outer planetary aspect (phyi-gza)= earth
Intermediate planetary aspect (bar-gza) = wood
Inner planetary aspect (nang-gza) = earth
Pebble symbolising contrast between the outer and intermediate planetary aspects
Jupiter
The outer planetary aspects form three compatible groups
Corresponding to their [luck] elements,
As in the case of the earth tiger, horse and dog years. 75
Saturn
XX
Then, having ascertained the destiny element of the outer planetary aspect,
Pebble symbolising contrast between the outer and inner planetary aspects
Pebble symbolising contrast between the intermediate and outer planetary aspects
00
00
Pebble symbolising contrast between the intermediate and inner planetary aspects
Pebble symbolising contrast between the inner and outer planetary aspects
The vitality element of the intermediate planetary aspect,
And the constitutional type of the inner planetary aspect, 76
Six further pebbles should then be placed
Representing the negative and positive attributes(of these three aspects).
Enhancement and inhibition 78 [due respectively to friend- and enemy-relationships]
Pebble symbolising contrast between the inner and intermediate planetary aspects
XX
Should be examined in relation to these,
Since the outer planetary aspect is contrasted with the intermediate and inner aspects,
The intermediate planetary aspect is contrasted with the outer and inner aspects,
And the inner planetary aspect is contrasted with the outer and intermediate aspects. 79



166
The White Beryl
Prognostications concerning the impact of the mother's planetary luck aspects on childbirth (White Beryl, ff. 1976–203b)
Particular predictions can be made concerning the future of a child and its well-being on the basis of the mother's natal sign, trigram and
This topic is summarised by Lo-chen Dharmaśrī as follows the age at which she gives birth. If the natal sign of the child belongs to a compatible intermediate planetary aspect, this prediction is
(Moonbeams; f. 24b):
known as a ‘triple planetary alliance' (gza'-spun gsum), and if it belongs to one of the other groups of intermediate planetary aspects, only
two planetary aspects are present, the prediction being called 'birth under an extraneous planetary aspecť (gza'-gzhan skyes). In White
Another method supplementing these basic (calculations]
Beryl, ff. 1976–203b, these distinctions are made in detail for women who give birth between the ages of fifteen and fifty, and clearly illus-
Derives from the cycle of secretly pointed-out' instructions: 80
trated in tabular form (Plate 4, fig. 7).
When a child is born in a year
For example, when a mother's natal sign is the earth horse, iron dog, water tiger, wood horse or fire dog, and her
Belonging to a naturally compatible intermediate planetary aspect
trigram is Zin (wood), and she gives birth respectively at the age of 15, 23, 31, 39 or 47, if her child is born in a compatible tiger, horse or
At a time when the mother's log-men,
dog year, the prediction is known as a 'Triple Saturn Alliance'. On this basis, it is said that kings and ministers will have an uninterrupted
Coinciding with this intermediate planetary aspect,
succession, trees will flourish, and the child will have long life free from ill-health, dying in old age and with average wealth. However, if
Encounters a (compatible) inner planetary aspect,
her child is born in a year with an extraneous planetary luck aspect the predictions differ. If birth occurs in the mouse, dragon or monkey
The prediction is called a 'Triple Planetary Alliance'.
year, there is a Mars-Saturn conjunction, predicting that there will continuously be inauspicious factors, the family line will end due to
If the birth lacks this naturally compatible [factor),
blood feuds, the father's brothers will prosper and the child will have long life and average wealth, eventually dying through accidental
But takes place in conjunction with the mother's planetary aspect,
injury. Similarly, if her child is born in a bird, ox or snake year, there is a direct Saturn-Jupiter conjunction, predicting that the child will
The prediction is called 'Birth under an Extraneous Planetary Aspect'.
have wondrous attributes, but that the spirit lords of the soil will still cause affliction to the dead and the living, inducing suicide and
fatalities due to spears. Or else, in early life, the child will flourish, holding onto wealth, but still become impoverished in later life, and
eventually die due to possession by primordial bewitchers (ye-'brog). Similarly, if her child is born in a pig, sheep or hare year, there is a
direct Saturn-Mercury conjunction, predicting that wealth will be dissipated, spirit lords of the soil will cause affliction from the mater-
nal uncle's domain, the paternal relatives will be dispersed, and their wealth diminished. In early life and mid-life, there will be good
prospects, but impure diseases will eventually take their toll, and the subject will be widowed.
Plate 4, fig. 7
1
JE
TE
)
TI
TE
OTRO
ATIN
NUT
Y
WELL
TITIL
III
La
BUT SUR
I
24 29 moim
as 9C 79 Elo
20W game on
ga
24 cm
192 20 26 os.
21
NI
GO
Adic
ube
11
Vid
ZAILY
EN 126
OT
Da
ALTH
NI
AN
VAN
1



167
Divinations of natal horoscope
Plate 4, fig. 7 (Ms l: ff. 16–19): Prognostications concerning the impact of the mother's planetary luck aspects on childbirth
When a mother's natal sign is the When a mother's natal sign is the When a mother's natal sign is the fire
earth horse, iron dog, water tiger, fire snake, earth bird, iron ox,
dragon, earth monkey, iron mouse,
wood horse or fire dog
water snake or wood bird
water dragon or wood monkey
and her trigram is Zin
and her trigram is Gin
and her trigram is Kham
and she gives birth respectively and she gives birth respectively and she gives birth respectively
at the age of 15, 23, 31, 39 or 47 at the age of 16, 24, 32, 40 or 48 at the age of 17, 25, 33, 41 or 49
if her child is born in a tiger, horse if her child is born in a bird, ox
if her child is born in a mouse,
or dog year
or snake year
dragon or monkey year
there is a Triple Saturn alliance
there is a Triple Jupiter alliance there is a Triple Mars alliance
predicting that kings and ministers predicting that the child will have predicting that property and persons
will have an uninterrupted
many ordinary but few special
will be cursed, the child's parents
succession, children will take care relatives, problems will arise due will get divorced, there will be blood
of their parents, the foliage of trees to the infringement of the spirit feuds, much misfortune, and the
will flourish, and the child will have lords of the soil and plague-causing squandering of resources, while the
long life free from ill-health, dying spirits (gnyan), the land will be home will be abandoned due to Bon
of an injury in old age and with deserted due to Bon or Buddhist or Buddhist imprecations. Although
average wealth.
imprecations, and if the subject is in later life wealth will increase,
a king the people will rebel, the death will eventually come through
house will be afflicted by the spirit drowning, tumours, dropsy or some
lords of the soil, and death will come other type of pollution.
due to contagious diseases.
Demons will also beset maternal
relatives, yet the child will have
great wealth and a pleasant old age.
However, if her child is born in a However, if her child is born in a However, if her child is born in a
mouse, dragon or monkey year mouse, dragon or monkey year tiger, horse or dog year
there is a Mars-Saturn conjunction there is a Mars-Jupiter conjunction there is a Mars-Saturn conjunction
predicting that there will
predicting that successive
predicting that birth will take place
continuously be inauspicious
generations will be stronger, that in an ignoble family, there will be
factors, the family line will end due high mountain grasslands will be flattering of superiors and despising
to blood feuds, the father's
burnt, that vultures will hover,
of inferiors, which provokes the
brothers will drift apart, and
chieftains and senior goatherds will hostility of Bon and Buddhist priests.
enemies will arise, yet there will be become unlucky, dying due to a However, the child will have long life
two sons with long life and average blood feud, yet there will be two and be well educated, becoming
wealth, eventually dying
who prosper with long life.
proficient in the practices of Bon or
accidentally after brandishing a Eventually, however, bad reputation Buddhism, and eventually dying
firebrand (phyags-shing klad-skor will incur the enmity of Buddhist due to diseases of the muscle
gri-khar 'ch)
monks, and death will follow due tissue (Ihog-pa).
to plague.
When a mother's natal sign is the
wood hare, fire sheep, earth pig,
iron hare or water sheep
and her trigram is Khen
and she gives birth respectively
at the age of 18, 26, 34, 42 or 50
if her child is born in a pig, sheep
or hare year
there is a Triple Mercury alliance
predicting that property and
persons will be cursed, servants will
surpass their lords, a high peak will
be overgrown by a single artemisia
plant, a single soldier will subdue
the border lands, medicinal herbs
will grow on dry grassland, and the
child will have long life, prospering
in later years. Afflictions will come
due to Bon or Buddhist ritual
daggers (kīla), and due to king
spirits or demons. Death will be
accidental.
When a mother's natal sign is the
wood tiger, fire horse, earth dog
or iron tiger
and her trigram is Dva
and she gives birth respectively
at the age of 19, 27, 35 or 43
if her child is born in a tiger,
horse or dog year
there is a Triple Saturn alliance
predicting that the family line will
be noble and heroic, paternal
relatives will instigate a blood feud,
and the enmity of a maternal uncle
will cause the child to move home.
The child will have a long life, while
its wealth will fluctuate, prospering
in later life, and it will eventually
die in a fire accident.
When a mother's natal sign is the
water ox, wood snake, fire bird
or earth ox
and her trigram is Khon
and she gives birth respectively
at the age of 20, 28, 36 or 44
if her child is born in a bird,
ox or snake year
there is a Triple Jupiter alliance
predicting that there will be wounds,
harmful spirit lords of the soil, and
an interruption to the family line,
bringing demonic curses of the king
spirits and attachment spirits in its
wake, there will be death due to
avalanches, a secure home will
become a wilderness, and the child
will be prone to serpentine spirits
and lake-dwelling mermaids
(sman-mo). The spirit lords will
afflict the house and land, and
leprosy will be provoked, yet
nonetheless the child will be rich.
When a mother's natal sign is the
water mouse, wood dragon, fire
monkey or earth mouse
and her trigram is Li
and she gives birth respectively
at the age of 21, 29, 37 or 45
if her child is born in a mouse,
dragon or monkey year
there is a Triple Mars alliance
predicting that mountains will be
burnt and gardens flooded, persons
and property will both be
inauspicious, and the family line
will end due to a curse, the father's
friends will not be steadfast, and he
will be subjected to scandalous
rumour, but his two children will
have average wealth, eventually
dying of a head injury.
However, if her child is born in a
mouse, dragon or monkey year
there is a Mars-Mercury conjunction
predicting that there will be curses,
sons will maintain their fathers'
houses, and grandsons their
grandfathers' houses, relatives will
become hostile, and the
generations will be successively
stronger. There will be inauspicious
afflictions due to attachment spirits
(bsen-mo), but two children will
have great authority and long life,
eventually dying due to fever.
However, if her child is born in a
mouse, dragon or monkey year
there is a Saturn-Mars conjunction
predicting that the child will be born
in a noble and heroic family going
back many generations, but severe
compensations will be levied, the
property of father and brother will
be cursed, tombs will be desecrated,
and the child will die of knife-
wounds. In short, wealth will be
squandered, relatives will be
estranged, and the family line
broken, save for the father himself.
However, if her child is born in a
tiger, horse or dog year
there is a Jupiter-Saturn conjunction
predicting that kings will be well
counselled for many generations,
while father and brothers will die
accidental deaths. Wealth will be
fine, and there will be long life, in
which one incurs the wrath of
Buddhist monks, eventually dying
of angina and muscular spasm.
However, if her child is born in a
tiger, horse or dog year
there is a Mars-Saturn conjunction
predicting that the child will be
born into an unbroken noble family
of high education, there will be
long life, and great consumption
of wealth, but the child will die
while travelling and the skull will be
lost. The paternal relatives will be
subjected to blood feuds, and
affliction due to the spirit lords
of the soil.
When a mother's natal sign is the
iron pig, water hare, wood sheep
or fire pig
and her trigram is Zon
and she gives birth respectively
at the age of 22, 30, 38 or 46
if her child is born in a pig,
sheep or hare year
there is a Triple Mercury alliance
predicting that persons and
property will be exhausted due to
great curses, there will be heavy
misfortunes, and the child will
endure many ups and downs,
being unable to maintain its
father's and grandfather's
homes. There will be affliction
due to king spirits or spirit lords of
the soil, and madness associated
with heart and wind disorders,
the environment will become
hostile, and the child will be
afflicted by ingressing demons
and ritual daggers (kīla).
However, if her child is born in a
mouse, dragon or monkey year
there is a Mercury-Mars conjunction
predicting that there will be onerous
misfortune, the parents will get
divorced, and there will be rumours
and disastrous imprecations
invoked by Bon priests and
Buddhists. The house will be
afflicted by demons, the country
will become divided, and people will
commit suicide, the skulls being
scattered by spirit lords of the soil
and serpentine spirits. There will
be a bastard child of average wealth
and long life, eventually dying due
to the contagious diseases of
attachment spirits (bsen-mo).
However, if her child is born in a
tiger, horse or dog year
there is a Mercury-Saturn
conjunction
predicting that the child will be an
educated aristocrat, respecting both
Bon and Buddhism, yet susceptible to
many ups and downs. The family line
will be interrupted and the child will
die abroad. Paternal relatives will
disagree, kings will give punishment,
important persons will grow hostile,
while house and land will be afflicted
by serpentine spirits and lake-
dwelling mermaids (sman-mo). The
child will die due to a blood feud,
despite having excellent wealth and
long life.
However, if her child is born in a
bird, ox or snake year
there is a Mercury-Jupiter
conjunction
predicting that the child will be able
to maintain the family line, but it will
be exiled owing to religious
disenchantment. There will be
childlessness, the tombs will be
desecrated, and although the child
may have three estates and excellent
wealth, the paternal line will be
interrupted.
However, if her child is born in a
tiger, horse or dog year
there is a Mercury-Saturn
ction
However, if her child is born in a
bird, ox or snake year
there is a Saturn-Jupiter
conjunction
predicting that there will be
childlessness and afflictions to the
house and land caused by the spirit
lords of the soil. Secure homes will
be abandoned and evil spirits will
emerge, inducing suicide and
fatalities due to spears. In early life,
the child will flourish, holding onto
wealth, but still become
impoverished in later life, and
eventually die due to possession by
primordial bewitchers (ye-'brog).
However, if her child is born in a
tiger, horse or dog year
there is a Jupiter-Saturn
conjunction
predicting that the child's parental
relatives will have many protectors,
but the child will be kind to itself,
showing little regard for its parents'
kindness, and despite family friction,
it will enjoy happiness and a ripe
old age, eventually dying an
accidental death.
However, if her child is born in a
bird, ox or snake year
there is a Saturn-Jupiter
conjunction
predicting that the child will be
cursed so as to exhaust the bodies
of three lives in a single lifetime, it
will be subjected to gossip, and
many misfortunes. The spirit lords of
the soil and plague-causing spirits
(gnyan) will cause affliction, but
wealth will be adequate, the child
eventually dying due to a
drowning accident
predicting that there will be wild ass
flesh in the mouths of wolves; the
foliage, fruits and flowers of the
wish-granting tree will ripen; and
paternal relatives will die due to a
blood feud, or fall from a high
building, or suffer head injuries.
The child will travel abroad, and die
an untimely death due to
infectious diseases.
However, if her child is born in a
bird, ox or snake year
there is a Saturn-Jupiter
conjunction
predicting that kings will become
commoners, and good fathers will
have inferior children and servants,
unable to maintain the status of their
forefathers. One son will have the
destiny to lead a dog, the spirit lords
of the soil will cause affliction, the
family line will be interrupted, the
house and land beset by spirit lords,
yet there will be excellent wealth
and food, the child eventually
dying abroad.
However, if her child is born in a
bird, ox or snake year
there is a Mars-Jupiter
conjunction
predicting that the child will be born
into a noble family and travel widely,
befriended by important persons, yet
the estates will be divided, wealth and
property being minimal in early life,
and improving in later life. If the
subject does not move house in early
life, there will be afflictions causing
disability, and despite long life, he or
she will die due to miasma diseases
induced by the spirit lords of the soil.
However, if her child is born in a
mouse, dragon or monkey year
there is a Jupiter-Mars
conjunction
predicting that two kings will reign
simultaneously, while the house, land
and tombs will be strewn with gra-ma
bushes, copses of trees and boulders.
A green turquoise will appear in a
narrow square, fires will blaze on the
grasslands, and noble families will
experience many ups and downs. The
family will be educated, but incur the
enmity of Bon or Buddhist priests, and
the subject will die of a riding accident
or asphyxiation, the two children being
rich in early life and impoverished
in mid-life.
However, if her child is born in a
pig, sheep or hare year
there is a Jupiter-Mercury
conjunction
predicting that the child will endure
many ups and downs, misfortunes,
and flagrant rumours. There will be
six twins disabled at birth, and death
will come through drowning. Many
spirits will cause affliction and
childlessness, and death will ensue
due to an avalanche or due to
infectious diseases. In short, luck will
diminish, and the subject will be
befriended by the mighty and
despised by the lowly.
However, if her child is born in a
pig, sheep or hare year
there is a Saturn-Mercury
conjunction
predicting that wealth will be
dissipated, spirit lords will cause
affliction from the maternal uncle's
domain, the family line will be
ended, paternal relatives will be
scattered and their wealth diminished.
In early and mid-life, there will be
excellent property; however,
diseases will eventually take their
toll, and the subject will be widowed.
However, if her child is born in a
pig, sheep or hare year
there is a Jupiter-Mercury
conjunction
predicting that the child will be
exposed to all sorts of good and bad
people, wealth will be spent, there
will be physical disability, and the
house and land will be afflicted by
the spirit lords of the soil.
Compensation will have to be paid,
and after many misfortunes, the
relatives will grow hostile, scattering
the skulls of the ancestors.
The subject will eventually die due
to dropsy, and will have two children
who prosper in later life.
However, if her child is born in a
pig, sheep or hare year
there is a Mars-Mercury
conjunction
predicting that wealth will be
squandered and rumours rife, and
the actions of many lives will be
carried through in a single lifetime.
Befriended by aristocrats but cut off
from paternal relatives, the subject
will die abroad, luck will diminish and
the children will break the family line,
eventually dying due to drowning,
wounds, injury or tumours.
However, if her child is born in a
bird, ox or monkey year
there is a Mercury-Jupiter
conjunction
predicting that the child will be born
into an educated family, and with
strength if a male subject. The
subject will have children in early
and later life, but the skulls of the
ancestors will not be properly buried,
he or she will move house, and
although there are many paternal
relatives, few will be special. The
children will die due to infectious
diseases, and their domain will
become hostile, despite their
having great wealth.
However, if her child is born in a
pig, sheep or hare year
there is a Saturn-Mercury
conjunction
predicting that the child will endure
great degeneration, spirit lords of the
soil will cause affliction in the house
and land, the paternal relatives will
be dispersed, and the subject will die
due to dropsy. There will be many
children, but two of them will live
long prosperous lives before dying
accidentally. The prospects will
improve if Bon and Buddhist rites
are performed.
However, if her child is born in a
pig, sheep or hare year
there is a Mars-Mercury
conjunction
predicting that the child will enjoy the
wealth of three lives in a single lifetime,
but many enemies will appear. Spirit
lords of the soil from the maternal
uncle's domain will cause affliction,
bringing misfortunes and interruption
to the family line. Despite having long
life, the subject will move house and
die accidentally.



168
The White Beryl
Prognostications concerning auspicious and inauspicious nativity luck aspects (skyes-klung bzang-ngarr, White Beryl, ff. 209b-210a)
Based on the father's natal sign, predictions may be made concerning the auspicious or inauspicious factors associated with a child's birth.
Auspicious factors generally occur when the mother's luck aspect is properly secured, and inauspicious ones when the father's sign has an
enemy-relationship with that of the child. For example, when the father's natal year is the tiger or hare, and the child's is either the horse
or snake, the auspicious prediction is known as “great luminosity' (snang-gsal 'od-po che). However, when the father's natal sign is the tiger
or hare, and the child is born in a bird or monkey year, there is an utterly inauspicious prediction of a short lifespan (tshe-thung 'phral
phugs-ngan). See Plate 5, fig. 5, where these divinations are fully presented in tabular form.
།ཕམའི་ལེ།
༄༅།ཕ་མའི་ལོ།
MO
༄༅།བུ་ཚའིལེ། །
༈། བུཚའི་ལེ།
WERK
།བཟང་པོའི་མིང་དེའི་མིང་ཤ་སྣང་གསལ་འོདཔེ་མ།
བར་བའི།
།མདུང་རྩེསྲིནམེ་རྐང༌། །རྒྱ་མཚོགཏིང་མེད། །དབུག་བསཾསེང་བྱས་
MIEGANGENI (
RATA
)
C
Plate 5, fig. 5
259CARTAK
ལུགས་ངན། ༄༅།ཚེ་ཐངའཕྲལ་ཕུགས་ན།
ཕུགས་ན།
།ཚོན་འཕྲལ་ཕུགས་ངན།
Plate 5, fig. 5 (Ms I: ff. 20-24): Prognostications concerning auspicious and inauspicious nativity luck aspects
If the father's natal year
tiger; hare
horse; snake
ox; sheep;
bird; monkey
mouse; pig
tiger; hare
horse; snake
ox; sheep;
bird; monkey
mouse; pig
If the father's natal year is
as follows (pha-ma'i lo)
dog; dragon
dog; dragon
is as follows (pha-ma'i lo)
and the child's natal year
horse; snake
ox; sheep;
bird; monkey
mouse; pig
tiger; hare
and the child's natal year is
bird; monkey
mouse; pig
tiger; hare
horse; snake
ox; sheep;
dog; dragon
dog; dragon
is as follows (bu-tsha'i lo)
there will be an auspicious
as follows (bu-tsha'i lo)
there will be the following
'great luminosity'
high fortress
'spear at the top and
bottomless ocean
'flourishing wish-
short lifespan,
short lifespan,
short lifespan,
short lifespan,
short lifespan,
prediction named
construction'
sister at the bottom
(rgya-mtsho
granting tree'
inauspicious result
inauspicious in both
inauspicious in both
(snang-gsal
"od-po che)
inauspicious in both
the short and long
inauspicious in both
the short and long
(bzang-po'i ming de'i ming)
(mtho-ba mkhar-du
(mdung-rtse
gting-med)
(dpag-bsam
(sngan-ba'i 'bras-bu)
the short and long
the short and long
i nauspicious in both
the short and long
term (tshe-thung
'phral phugs-ngan)
brtsigs)
sring-mo rkang)
sdong-rgyas)
term (tshe-thung
'phral phugs-ngan)
term (tshe-thung
'phral phugs-ngan)
term (tshe-thung
'phral phugs-ngan)
term (tshe-thung
'phral phugs-ngan)
Concerning the five categories of inauspicious signs in particular, Lo-chen Dharmaśrī (Moonbeams, f. 25a) adds:
When a child's [natal year] is in an enemy-relationship
With the vitality element of four successive generations of paternal ancestors,
Exemplified by a child born in a mouse or pig year
When its four successive generations of paternal ancestors
were of the horse or snake year,
The prediction is called the 'Fixing of Bondage and Impediments: 81
In general, it is said that when the mother's luck element secures the sector, the sector of the natal month associated with the trigram and
that of the mother's destiny element will both be auspicious. However, the mother will have difficulty in raising a child when the sector of
the trigram is inauspicious. For example, when a child is born in a tiger or hare year under the natal trigram Dva (iron), the sector of the
trigram is deemed to be inauspicious because it is in an enemy-relationship with the natal sign. See the complete chart on Plate 5, fig. 6.
Plate 5, fig. 6
༄༅། བུ་ཚའི་ལོ།
།སྐྱེས་སྦྱར།
བྱ།ལོ་ཡི་ཀླུངས་ངནནི།
ལ་དགྲའི་སང་ཁར་སསན་ཡོན་
Plate 5, fig. 6 (Ms I: ff. 20–21): Prognostications concerning the mother's difficulty in raising a child
If the child's natal year is the following (bu-tsha'i lo)
and combined with the following natal trigram (skyes-spar)
the inauspicious luck aspect of the year (10-yi klungs-ngan-ni)
li
tiger; hare
horse; snake bird; monkey
Ox; sheep; dog; dragon mouse; pig
Dva
Kham
Zin
Khon
portends that if a child is born under such a trigram in an enemy-relationship with the year-sign, the sector of the
trigram will be inauspicious (lo dgra'i spar-kha skyes-na spar-kha'i gdan-sa ngan-pa zer-ro)
As for the natal months coinciding with the inauspicious sectors of ill-health, death and tomb, it is said that the season of the year coincid-
ing with these sectors is determined by the element in a mother-relationship with the vitality element of the natal sign. For example, the
fire element, which is in a mother-relationship with the ox, sheep, dog or dragon natal signs, portends a divination coinciding with the
three autumn seasonal months. Among these, the first autumn month (monkey) coincides with the sector of ill-health, the mid-autumn



169
Divinations of natal horoscope
month (bird) with the sector of death, and the last autumn month (dog) with the sector of tomb. One whose birth occurs during these
months under the given year-sign is susceptible to ill-health or death during that period, or else the father may be susceptible. See the full
chart on Plate 5, fig. 10.
Plate 5, fig. 10
བུལིལོ་རྟ་དང་སྲོག་གི་མ་གཟུགས།
༄༅།ཤ་བ་ལང་དར་ཟམ་འཛགནངས་ནས
༄། སྲོག་མའི་སྟེར་འགེ།
༄༅།ར་བ་ན་སང་རང་དང་ཕམར་ངུན།
༄༅།འབྲང་པོའི་ས་ལཕངལཕམ་ན།
༄༅།ཐཆུང་དུ་ས་རུང་ངམ་ཕ་མར་ན།
བྱjསོས་ས་འདིམསཤིས།
Xyind
uity
RuM
། སུས་ཟླ་འདི་རྣམས་དུར་ས།
Plate 5, fig. 10 (Ms I: ff. 22-24): Natal months coinciding with ill-health, death, or tomb sectors of growth and decline
Natal sign of child and element in
ox, sheep, dog or dragon year, in
bird or monkey year, in
mother-relationship with its
relationship with fire element,
relationship with earth element,
mouse or pig year, in
horse or snake year, in
tiger or hare year, in
Starting point for computational sequence based
relationship with iron element,
relationship with wood element,
relationship with water element,
on season indicated by the element in a mother-
relationship with the child's vitality element
indicating calculation pertains to
indicating calculation pertains to
indicating calculation pertains to
indicating calculation pertains to
indicating calculation pertains to
vitality element (bu'i lo-rtags-dang
srog-gi ma gzugs)
The following natal months coincide with
the autumn seasonal months
the spring seasonal months
the winter seasonal months
the summer seasonal months
the spring/autumn seasonal months
(Srog-ma'i skor-'go)
monkey
tiger
pig
snake
tiger
First seasonal month coinciding with the sector
of ill-health, inauspicious to oneself and one's
the sector of ill-health (zla-ba 'di-rnams
rang-rang-gi na-sar skyes-pa)
The following natal months coincide
father (rab na-sar rang-dang pha-mar ngan)
bird
hare
mouse
horse
hare
Mid-seasonal month coinciding with the sector
with the sector of death
of death, inauspicious to oneself and one's father
(skyes-sa 'di-rnams shi-sa)
('bring-po shi-sa rang-ngam pha-mar ngan)
The following natal months coincide
dog
dragon
OX
sheep
dragon
Last seasonal month coinciding with the sector
with the sector of tomb
(skyes-zla 'di-rnams dur-sa)
of tomb, inauspicious to oneself and one's father
(tha-chung dur-sa rang-ngam pha-mar ngan)
Prognostications concerning auspicious coincidences of destiny elements and natal trigrams, and inauspicious coincidences of natal trigrams and natal years (White Beryl, f. 210a)
Predictions may be made concerning the auspicious and inauspicious types of relationship that a child will have with maternal and pater-
nal relatives, and so forth. For example, it is predicted that a child born with an earth destiny element and the natal trigram Li (fire), will
show kindness to maternal relatives. However, a child born under the Khon (earth) trigram in a tiger year is predicted to be afflicted by
the spirit lords of the soil. The full correspondences are given on Plate 5, fig. 8.
Plate 5, fig. 8
( ཁམས་བཞི།
སྐྱེས་སྤར་
༄༅།སྐྱེས་སྤར།
སྐྱེས་ལ་
©རང་གིས་བསང་
། འབྲས་བུ།
འོ་ཕྱོགས་ལ་བསམ། བླ་མ་སྤྱིའི་ཡུལ་མཁར་
བྱ།ཐོས་འབྱ ས་བའགནོད།
ཤཱ།ཆུ་མ་ཡམ་སྐྱོང་ལ། །དགྲ་དང་གོངལ་འོང|ཞེ་འཁོརནོརལ་ན།
མ་བདག་གནོད།
Gamitigillus
ANAK
Aas
SAM Star
Plate 5, fig. 8 (Ms l: ff. 20-24): Prognostications concerning auspicious and inauspicious coincidences of element or year-sign and natal trigram
earth
water
fire
wood
Khon
Gin
Khen
Zon
If the natal trigram is as
follows (skyes-spar)
Dya
Kham
tiger; hare
bird; monkey
horse; snake
ox; sheep;dog; dragon
If the (destiny] element
is as follows (khams-bzhi)
and the natal trigram
is as follows (skyes-spar)
the following auspicious
result is predicted ('bras-bu)
and the natal year is as
follows (skyes-lo)
the following inauspicious
result is predicted ('bras-bu)
kindness will be shown
gratitude will be shown
merits will be accumulated
the wife, mother-in-law
there will be enemies and
to maternal relatives
maternal estates and
mansions will be excellent
(ma phy'i yul mkhar-bzang
by the subject (rang-gis
there will be affliction
by spirit lords of the soil
(sa-bdag gnod)
and brother-in-law will
to paternal relatives
(pha-khuki drin-lan yod
losses, inauspicious to
it will be inauspicious for
the wealth of relatives
(nye-'khor nor-la ngan)
(mo-phyogs-la byams)
bsod-nams bsags)
be afflicted by spirit lords
the paternal uncle
of the soil (chung-ma yams-
skud-la sa-bdag gnod)
(dgra-dang god-kha
'ong khu-bor ngan)
On the inauspicious category, Lo-chen Dharmaśrī also writes (Moonbeams, f. 25a):
When children are born under the trigram Khon in a tiger or hare year,
Under the trigram Gin in a bird or monkey year,
Under the trigram Khen in a horse or snake year,
And under the trigram Zon in an ox, dragon, sheep, dog, mouse or pig year,
The prediction is known as Weighty Slingshot of Past Actions. 82
Prognostications concerning times of childbirth inauspicious to parents or relatives (White Beryl, f. 210b)
In general, it will be inauspicious if males are born under the four cardinal trigrams, and females under the four intermediate trigrams,
since this can have a negative impact on the father or brother, even if the son or daughter should prosper. It is said that when a son is born
the father will die early if his trigram is Zin and the mother's trigram is Dva, but that when a daughter is born, the mother will die early if
her trigram is Gin and the father's is Zin.



170
The White Beryl
Opposite Detail of Plate 5, fig. 7 (see below), showing the inauspicious
and auspicious luck aspects of the years
In particular, if the child's natal sign or trigram has an enemy-relationship (dgra-bdud) with that of the mother, father or elder sibling, it
will be inauspicious. For example, any son born to a mother of the dog or dragon year under the Khen trigram will be inauspicious for the
father, and conversely, a child born in a dog or dragon year under the trigram Khen will also be inauspicious for the father, regardless of
the mother's year-sign. The outcome is also inauspicious for the father when his natal trigram is Khen and the son's is Li, and so forth; or
when an elder son has the natal trigram Khon and the younger has the trigram Kham, and so forth.
The time of childbirth may similarly be inauspicious for the mother, as when a mother of the sheep or ox sign has
a daughter under the Khon trigram, or for the sister, as when a mother of the dog or dragon sign has a son born under the Zon trigram.
The prognosis is inauspicious for the brother when a woman of any year-sign has a daughter of the ox or sheep year under the Gin tri-
gram. Lastly, it is inauspicious for the grandfather when a mother of any year-sign has a daughter born, for example, in the tiger, hare,
bird or monkey year under the trigram Dva or Zin. The full chart illustrating these relationships is given in Plate 5, figs 11–12.
BSN
Plate 5, fig. 11
jམའི་ལེང་བབས་སར།
སྐྱེས་སྐར།
ཁུ་བྱུས་བར་བྱ།
Plate 5, fig. 11 (Ms I: ff. 20-22): Childbirth inauspicious for the father
If the mother's year-sign and dog; dragon
[any year-sign]
Khen
Li
Khon
Dva
Khen
Kham
Gin
Zin
Zon
It will be inauspicious if the
father's natal trigram is
trigram are as follows
Khen
Khen
It will be inauspicious if the
natal trigram of the first son is
(bu snong-ma'i skyes-spar)
and the natal trigram of
(ma'i lo-dang babs-spar)
the following childbirth will
a son
a child born in dog or
(pha'i skyes-spar)
and the son's natal trigram is
(bu'i skyes-spar)
Li
Khen
Kham
Zin
Li
Khon
Zon
Dva
Gin
be inauspicious for the father
dragon year
the next son is
(rjes-ma'i skyes-spar)
(bu-skyes phar-ngan)
Plate 5, fig. 12
༄༅།མའིལ་དུ་བབས་པར
བུ་ཕོ་མའི་ལ།
༄༅།འདིལ་ངན། །
211051
སངས
༧སམཇའབོད་
Go
མིངཔེར་ན།
ཐ།སྒྱིད་པོ་བགྲངས། ྋསྐྱེདཔོ་བགྲངས
AIRN
BA
51L
[any year-sign]
ox; sheep
[any year-sign]
[any year-sign]
[any year-sign]
[any year-sign]
dog; dragon
Zon
[any year-sign]
Khon; Gin
Zon
Gin
Gin
Kham
Dva; Zin
Zon; Khen
Plate 5, fig. 12 (Ms 1: ff. 20-22): Childbirth inauspicious for the mother and other relatives
If the mother's year-sign and trigram are sheep; Ox
[any year-sign]
as follows (ma'i lo-dang babs-spar)
Khon
Khon
and the year-sign of her son or daughter daughter of any sign daughter of sheep
is as follows (bu pho-mo'i lo)
or ox sign
it will be inauspicious for the following inauspicious for the inauspicious for the
person ('di-la ngan)
mother (mar-ngan) mother (mar-ngan)
son of any sign
son of dog or
son of any sign
daughter of ox or
daughter of horse; snake;
daughter of ox or
daughter of dog or
daughter of tiger; hare;
bird; or monkey sign
dragon sign
sheep sign
mouse; or pig sign
sheep sign
dragon sign
the sister should not
the sister should not
the sister should not
inauspicious for
inauspicious for
inauspicious for
the grandfather
inauspicious for
the brother
(ming-por ngan)
be invited (sring-mor
'bod rgyu- med
the grandfather
b e invited (sring-mor
'bod rgyu- med)
the grandfather
inauspicious for
the grandfather
(sgyed-po bgrangs)
be invited (sring-mor
'bod rgyu- med
(sgyed-po bgrangs)
(sgyed-po bgrangs)
(sgyed-po bgrangs)
Prognostications concerning inauspicious luck aspects of the years (lo-yi klungs ngart, White Beryl, f. 211b)
The years of the sexagenary cycle are grouped into eights, and these are subdivided into pairs endowed with antagonistic luck aspects, as
partially illustrated on Plate 5, fig. 7. For example, the fire tiger is said to ‘kill the luck aspect of the iron dragon, and so forth. Other years
are said to protect or 'save' the luck aspect, as well as the vitality, body and destiny aspects. For example, the earth tiger protects the luck
aspect of the iron snake, the iron snake protects that of the water dragon, and so forth.
D
C
Plate 5, fig. 7
Plate 5, fig. 7 (Msi: ff. 20–24): Inauspicious and auspicious luck aspects of the years
fire tiger kills
earth tiger kills
fire hare kills
earth hare kills
iron horse kills
earth horse kills
wood ox kills
water ox kills
earth tiger saves
iron snake saves
wood snake saves
iron mouse saves
earth horse saves
wood horse savesw ood monkey saves
earth bird saves
iron dragon
wata
water dragon
iron dog
wate
wood monkey
water monkey
earth pig
fire pig
iron snake
water
fire dragon
water hare
iron ox
fire ox
water mouse
fire mouse



171
Divinations of natal horoscope
WA
3
w
Woodland
28
.
si
NE
.
RE



172
The White Beryl
Prognostications concerning greater, middling and lesser degrees of ill-omen (Itas-ngan che-'bring-chung gsum, White Beryl, ff. 2116–212a)
The years harbour ill-omens of varying degrees, the most severe being the conjunction of the body and luck elements of the sheep and
snake, the middling being the conjunction of those same elemental aspects of the horse and snake, and the lesser being those of ox, sheep,
dog or dragon, with mouse or pig. Accordingly, if a mother has the snake as her year-sign, and her child is born in a sheep year, it is called
a year of great defect’; if her sign is the horse and the child's sign is the dragon, the year is one of 'middling defect; and if her year is the
mouse or pig, and the child's is the ox, sheep, dog or dragon, it is one of flesser defecť. See the chart on Plate 5, fig. 9. These distinctions
are considered important since marriage undertaken at such times can be inauspicious for the father, the parents and so forth.83
Plate 5, fig. 9
༄༅།མའི་ལ།
༄༅།ལྟས་ན་འབྲིང་པོ།
21321
ལྟས་ངན་ཆུང་བ།
༦།ལེ་སྐྱེན་གྱི་མིང་།
ལོ་སྐྱོན་ཆེ་བ།
(ལོ་སྐྱོན་འབྲིང་བ།
༄༅ལེ་སྐྱོན་ཆུང་བ།
D
400
sheep and snake
snake
horse
mouse and pig
Plate 5, fig. 9 (Ms I: ff. 20-21): Greater, middling and lesser degrees of ill-omen
Greater ill-omen is indicated by the following conjunctions of body and luck elements
(lus-klung Itas-ngan che-ba)
Middling ill-omen (Itas-ngan 'bring-po) is indicated by the following conjunctions
horse and snake
sheep
dragon
ox, sheep, dog or dragon
body and luck elements forming
a mother-relationship (ma'l lo)
body and luck elements forming
a son-relationship (bu'i lo)
defective year
(lo skyon-gyi ming)
Lesser ill-omen (Itas-ngan chung-ba) is indicated by the following conjunctions
ox, sheep, dog, dragon, mouse or pig
year of great defect
year of middling defect
year of less defect
(lo skyon che-ba)
(lo-skyon 'bring-ba)
(lo-skyon chung-ba)
Prognostications concerning even- and odd-numbered year-signs and trigrams (White Beryl, f. 212a)
The year-signs and trigrams may be utilised for calculating the age and the auspicious or inauspicious years of human life. According to
White Beryl, f. 212a (Plate 5, fig. 13), the tiger and hare, the bird and monkey and the horse and snake are considered to be even-numbered
‘goat-horns', along with their respective trigrams Dva, Zin and Zon; whereas the ox, sheep, dog, dragon, mouse and pig are considered to
be odd-numbered ‘rhino-horns', along with their trigrams, which are respectively Khen, Khon, Khon, Kham, Gin and Gin.
དརརུལེའི་མི་་
གྲངས་ཟུང༌།
༄༅།ར་དུ་སྤར་ཁའིམ་
I
གྲངས་ཟུང་།
TA
A
3)
TE
12
.
BE
སྦྱ། བསརུ་ལེའི་མི་
གྲས་ཡ་བ།
16
Lakigu
ez moi!
.
༄༅།བསརུ་སྤུར་ཁ་
མ་གངས་ཡ།
is
Plate 5, fig. 13
Plate 5, fig. 13 (Ms l: ff. 23-24): Even- and odd-numbered years and trigrams (White Beryl, f. 212a)
The even-numbered or 'goat-horn' years are as follows
tiger and hare
bird and monkey
horse and snake
(ra-ru lo'i mi-grangs zung)
The even-numbered or 'goat-horn' trigrams are as follows
Dva
Tin
Zon
Ox
sheep
dog
dragon
mouse
pig
(ra-ru spar-kha'i mi-grangs zung)
The odd-numbered or 'rhino-horn' years are as follows
(bse-ru lo'i mi-grangs ya-ba)
The odd-numbered or 'rhino-horn' trigrams are as follows
Khen
Khon
Khon
Kham
Gin
Gin
(bse-ru spar-kha mi-grangs ya)
A more detailed presentation (not mentioned in White Beryl) is given on Supplementary Plate 16, figs 2–5, following four distinct tradi-
tions. First (fig. 2), according to the accurate tradition of the Phug-pa school (rnam-dag lugs), the even-numbered category comprises the
trigrams Li, Dva, Zin and Zon, and the year-signs ox, tiger, dragon, snake, sheep, monkey, dog and pig, along with the destiny elements
fire and earth; while the odd-numbered category comprises the trigrams Khen, Khon, Gin and Zon, and the year-signs mouse, horse, bird
and hare, along with the destiny elements wood, water and iron.



173
Divinations of natal horoscope
ངརས་པ་ཞི་དུ་ཚུགས་
Plate 16, fig. 2 (Ms II: f. 1): The accurate tradition concerning even and odd numbers
The accurate tradition concerning even and odd numbers (ra-bse rnam-dag lugs)
The even-numbered class of trigrams (spar-kha'i rva-ru) comprises
The odd-numbered class of trigrams (spar-kha'i bse-ru) comprises
Li; Dva; Zin; Zon
Khen; Khon; Gin; Kham
The odd-numbered class of years (lo'i bse-ru) comprises
mouse; horse; bird; hare
ox; tiger; dragon; snake; sheep; monkey; dog; pig
The even-numbered class of years (10'i ra-ru) comprises
The odd-numbered class of (destiny) elements ([dbang] 'byung-ba'i bse-ru) comprises
The even-numbered class of destiny elements (dbang-'byung ra-ru) comprises
wood; water; iron
fire; earth
Second (fig. 3), according to the Mottled Turtle (Rus-sbal khra-mo) tradition, the even-numbered trigrams are Li, Zon, Dva and Khon; the
odd-numbered trigrams are Khen, Gin and Kham; while the irregular or indefinite trigram is Zin.
Plate 16, fig. 3
laced
waren
-
Braut
Plate 16, fig. 3 (Ms II: f. 2): The mottled turtle tradition concerning even- and odd-numbered (trigrams)
The mottled turtle tradition concerning even- and odd-numbered (trigrams] (rva-bse rus-sbal khra-mo lugs)
The even-numbered class of trigrams (spar-kha'i rva-ru) comprises
Li; Zon; Dva; Khon
The odd-numbered class of trigrams (spar-kha'i bse-ru) comprises
Khen; Gin; Kham
The trigram which is mostly even-numbered but partly odd-numbered (mang-ra nyung-bse) is
.....
rigt
Zin
Plate 16, fig. 2.
Third (fig. 4), according to the Gathering of All Precious Elements ('Byung-ba rin-chen kun-'dus), the even-numbered trigrams are Khon,
Khen, Gin, Zon and Li while the odd-numbered ones are Dva, Kham and Zin, the last named also belonging to the irregular or indefinite
category.
Plate 16, fig. 4
a
frauizgroq241934 Watum
rod
KC
KO
astia
Bag
Plate 16, fig. 4 (Ms Il: f. 2): The tradition concerning even- and odd-numbered (trigrams] according to the Rin-chen kun-'dus
The tradition concerning even- and odd-numbered (trigrams] according to the Rin-chen kun-'dus (rva-bse rin-chen kun-'dus lugs)
The even-numbered class of trigrams (spar-kha'i rva-ru) comprises
Khon; Khen; Gin; Zon; Li
The odd-numbered class of trigrams (spar-kha'i bse-ru) comprises
Dva; Zin; Kham
The trigram which is mostly even-numbered but partly odd-numbered (mang-ra nyung-bse) is
Zin



174
The White Beryl
four gidiem
Fourth (fig. 5), according to the Astrological Commentary entitled Store of Precious Treasure (rTsis-'grel rin-chen gter-mdzod), the even-num-
bered category comprises the trigrams Khon, Gin, Li and Zon, and the year-signs ox, sheep, horse, snake and dragon, along with the des-
tiny elements fire and earth; whereas the odd-numbered category comprises the trigrams Dva, Zin and Kham, and the year-signs tiger,
hare, bird, monkey, mouse and pig, along with the destiny elements wood and iron. The irregular or indefinite numbered category com-
prises the trigram Khen, the year-sign dog and the destiny element water.
Punty
Plate 16, fig. 5 (Ms II: f. 3): The Store of Precious Treasure's tradition concerning even-and odd-numbered [signs and trigrams]
The Store of Precious Treasure's tradition concerning even-and odd-numbered [signs and trigrams] (ra-bse rin-chen gter-mdzod lugs)
The odd-numbered class of years (lo'i bse-ru) comprises
tiger; hare; bird; monkey; mouse; pig
The even-numbered class of years (lo'i ra-ru) comprises
ox; sheep; horse; snake; dragon
The odd-numbered class of (destiny] elements ([dbang) 'byung-ba'i bse-ru) comprises
wood; iron
jafing
The even-numbered class of destiny elements (dbang-'byung ra-ru) comprises
fire; earth
quis
The even-numbered class of trigrams (spar-kha'i rva-ru) comprises
Khon; Gin; Li; Zon
The odd-numbered class of trigrams (spar-kha'i bse-ru) comprises
Dva; Zin; Kham
The irregular (element, year-sign and trigram] ('chol-ba) comprise
water; dog; Khen
The calculation will generally result in a preponderance of odd or even numbers, indicating predictions of ill-health particularly during
inauspicious years. An odd number will not be advantageous in the context of an even-numbered category and vice versa. On this topic,
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī adds (Moonbeams, f. 25a/b):
COS
It is predicted that by ascertaining the terms
wered OOONID
DODIO
"Goat-horns', 'rhino-horns' and 'all-sorts'
In relation to the years, numeric squares and trigrams, 84
-
111
Human age can be calculated respectively
2
1h
As an even number, odd number or indefinite number. 85
D
Domus
Plate 16, fig. 5
Prognostications concerning the categories of inauspicious years (White Beryl, f. 212a/b)
The various categories of inauspicious years have already been enumerated. 86 At this juncture, the White Beryl commentary remarks on
some of the inauspicious factors associated with those years. The accursed eight fire years and four iron years, which are illustrated below,
Plate 6, fig. 7, are deemed to be inauspicious in that they generate continuous sufferings. For example, the iron mouse and ox years are asso-
ciated with the carrying of corpses, the iron dog and pig years with incomplete actions, the fire tiger and hare years with interruption of the
family line, and so forth. The seven malign years (gdug-ba-can-gyi lo bdun), including the fire and water tiger, are unsuitable for marriages.
As for the seven years of bad omen' (ltas-ngan lo), illustrated on Plate 6, fig. 8, the fire snake is indicated by a
traceless fire, the water bird by a trackless flight-path, and so forth. The years of the 'six lesser stars' (skar-chung drug), iron bird and so
forth, are considered similar to the aforementioned four iron and eight fire years in their inauspicious potential (Plate 6, fig. 8), while the
‘seven years of drought (than-pa lo bdun), headed by the earth dragon (Plate 6, fig. 9), are associated with the dwindling of the maternal
relatives' wealth and so forth. The fire horse and water mouse years, known respectively as the 'heavenly sentinel (gnam-gyi bya-ra) and
the ‘earthly sentinel (sa'i bya-ra), suggest misunderstandings and exhaustion (Plate 6, fig. 10). The twelve iron years between the iron
mouse and iron pig (Plate 6, fig. 10) are known as the 'years promoting drought (than-skyes lo), while the iron ox and so forth (Plate 6, fig.
11) are known as the 'four black undertakers' (dur-mi nag-po bzhi), and the water tiger and so forth (Plate 6, fig. 11) as the 'three soaring
black sons' (lding-nag bu gsum). The four 'black fanged years' (lo-nag mche-ba-can), illustrated on Plate 5, fig. 15, and labelled on Plate 6,
fig. 11, coincide with a Black Two natal numeric square, while the eleven years susceptible to ogres' (srin-khyer lo) include the water
mouse (Plate 5, fig. 16) and so forth. The four years known as “naked demons' (ther-'dre mi bzhi), starting with the fire horse (Plate 5, fig.
17) are associated with misfortunes due to possession by ogres and nāgas. The eight years endowed with the five elements’ and coincid-
ing with the three rows of numeric squares (see Plate 6, fig. 12) bring many fluctuations of growth and decline, while the ten years
endowed with two elements’ (Plate 6, fig. 13) suggest that the family line will eventually be interrupted even if one has a hundred chil-
dren! Other categories, illustrated on Supplementary Plate 16, fig. 6, include the ‘eight years of widowhood' (yugs-sa lo brgyad), such as
that of the iron monkey, and the eight orphan years’ (dva-phrug lo), such as that of the wood tiger. It is said that widowhood or orphan-
hood may occur if a parent born under a year-sign of widowhood has a child born under a year-sign of orphanhood.
ལེ་ངན་ལྕགས་བཞིམ་བརྒྱུད། །
Plate 6, fig. 7 (Ms I:ff. 27-30): Four iron and eight fire inauspicious years (lo-ngan Icags-bzhi me-brgyad)
Four iron and eight fire inauspicious years (lo-ngan Icags-bzhi me-brgyad)
iron dog
iron pig
iron mouse
iron ox
fire tiger
fire hare
fire dragon
fire snake
fire horse
fire sheep
fire monkey
fire bird



175
Divinations of natal horoscope
suvenirskom s
o
2
Plate 6, fig. 8 (Ms l: ff. 27-30): Seven years of bad omen' and 'six lesser stars'
Seven years of bad omen' (Itas-ngan lo bdun) and 'six lesser stars' (skar-chung drug)
fire snake
water pig
water bird
wood bird
iron sheep
earth bird
i ron pig
iron dog
iron bird
fire ox
fire monkey
earth dragon
water snake
ལ་ངན་ཐན་མ་བདུན།
Plate 6, fig. 9 (Ms l: ff. 27–29): Seven 'years of drought
Seven 'years of drought (lo ngan than-mi bdun)
earth dragon
iron sheep
earth monkey
iron bird
iron dog
fire pig
fire ox
HVAR
raqa
a 3-
3
31230135
water mowa "renmouse tonen som lyer tontere lontaran tren smake lon hose tien thosep " lon money iron bed lionog
Plate 6, fig. 10 (Ms I:ff. 29–30, 27-28): Two 'heavenly and earthly sentinel years' and the twelve years promoting drought
Two heavenly and earthly sentinel years' (gnam-sa'i bya-ra) and the
fire horse water mouse
twelve years promoting drought' (than-skyes bcu-gnyis)
iron mouse
iron ox
iron tiger
iron hare
iron dragon
iron snake
iron horse
iron sheep
iron monkey
iron bird
iron dog
lengig
iron pig
ལ་རན་པར་མ་བཞི་ལྡིང་ནག་
བུ་གསུ་ལེ་ནག་མཚབ་ཅན་པའི
Plate 6, fig. 11 (Ms l: ff. 29–30): Four 'black undertaker years' and three 'soaring black sons' (Iding-nag bu gsum)
Four 'black undertaker years' (lo-gnan dur mi bzhi), iron ox wood sheep fire dog
three 'soaring black sons' (Iding-nag bu gsum) 87
water dragon
water tiger
water snake (/iron monkey]
Plate 5, fig. 15 (Ms I:f. 20): Four 'black fanged years' coinciding with a Black Two natal numeric square (lo-nag mche-ba-can bzh)
[Captioned on Plate 6, fig. 11)
tiger monkey pig snake
བྱ། སྲིན་བྱང་ལོརྟ།
Plate 5, fig. 16 (Ms l: ff. 21-23): Eleven 'years susceptible to ogres'
Year-signs susceptible to ogres (srin-khyer lo-rtags)
water mouse
water horse
water bird
w
ater hare
earth pig
earth dragon
earth bird
earth hare
fire dragon
fire bird
water ox
Plate 5, fig. 17 (Ms I:f. 24): Four 'naked demons'
Four 'naked demons' (lo-ngan ther-'dre mi bzhi)
fire horse
water bird
wood hare
iron bird
སྦེ་འཕྲེང་གསུམ་གྱི་
འབྱང་ །
Plate 6, fig. 12 (Ms l: ff. 25–26): Eight 'years endowed with five elements'
Eight 'years endowed with five elements' as found in the three rows of
numeric squares (sme phreng gsum-gyi 'byung-ba Inga-ldan)
wood ox
wood dog and water snake
water sheep, earth mouse, wood sheep,
in top row
in middle row
earth pig and iron mouse in bottom row



176
The White Beryl
སྨ་འཕྲེང་གསུམ་གྱི་འབྱུང་བ་གཉིས་ལྡན།
ན་
Plate 6, fig. 13
Plate 6, fig. 13 (Ms I: ff. 27-30): Ten 'years endowed with two elements' ('byung-ba gnyis-Idan)
Ten‘years endowed with two elements' as found in the three rows of
fire hare, water bird, (earth sheep), 88
numeric squares (sme phreng gsum-gyi 'byung-ba gnyis-Idan)
and iron monkey in top row
water snake in
[fire hare],90 iron tiger, iron dog,
middle row89
water mouse and water pig in bottom row
་ཕྲུབ་དང་ཡུགས་སའི་ཕོ་ངན་སྤྱད་
པསུག
wnios
OS
Elimo
digo
བདུད་
re
Plate 16. fig. 6
Plate 16, fig. 6 (Ms II: ff. 4–5): Prognostications concerning the categories of inauspicious years (White Beryl, f. 212b)
The eight inauspicious year-signs of the orphan and widow classes (dva-phrug-dang yugs-sa'i lo-ngan brgyad)
The eight 'year-signs of widowhood' (yugs-sa'i lo-brgyad) comprise
iron monkey; iron pig; fire dragon; iron snake; earth sheep; iron mouse; wood snake; fire bird
The eight 'orphan year-signs' (dva-phrug-gi lo brgyad comprise
wood tiger; iron monkey; water dog; water monkey; fire tiger; water snake; earth dog; water pig
As far as the analysis of these categories of inauspicious years is concerned, Lo-chen Dharmaśrī adds (Moonbeams, f. 25b):
After examining carefully and in detail
Births coinciding with the inauspicious years,
Such as the accursed four iron and eight fire years, 91
As well as the corresponding) combined calculation of trigram and numeric square, 92 and so forth,
The sequence of predicted results pertaining to these calculations
Should be determined without error,
Since they comprise the authentic supernormal cognition of past signs
Which will continue to emerge in the future,
According to the scholarly texts,
Such as the Twenty Verse [Auto] Commentary on the Root Tantra, 93
The dMar-ston stag-mgo and sGang-sgril.94
Prognostications concerning the number of children based on the coincidence of the parents' destiny elements (White Beryl, ff. 224b-225a)
The number of children a couple will have is said to be predictable on the basis of the coincidence of their destiny elements. For example, if
the parents' destiny elements are wood and fire, it is predicted that they will have five children (two wood, one earth, and two fire), or else
ten children (five wood, two fire, two earth and one iron); whereas if the parents’destiny elements are both wood, they should have two chil-
dren (one wood and one fire), but only one useful child (one wood). The full chart is given on Plate 5, fig. 14, running over onto Plate 6, fig. 6.
Plate 5, fig. 14, and Plate 6, fig.6 (Ms I: ff. 24–26): Presentation of the numbers of children predicted on the basis of the coincidence of the parents' destiny elements (pha-ma'i dbang-thang 'phrad-pa'i sgo-nas mi-grangs-kyi mtshan-nyid bstan-pa-ni)
If the parents' destiny
If the parents' destiny
If the parents' destiny
If the parents' destiny
If the parents' destiny
elements are fire and earth
If the parents' destiny
elements are water and earth
If the parents' destiny
elements are wood and wood
If the parents' destiny
elements are wood and earth
elements are wood and fire
elements are water and wood
elements are fire and iron
they will have 5 children
they will have 4 children
they will have 3 children
elements are iron and wood
they will have 4 children
(1 water, 2 wood and 1 iron)
they will have 2 children
they will have 6 children
(4 fire, 1 earth and 1 iron)
they will have 2 children
they will have 5 children
(2 earth, 1 iron, 1 fire and 1 water)
(2 wood, 1 earth and 2 fire)
(4 wood)
(1 water, 1 earth and 1 fire)
(1 wood and 1 fire)
(1 wood and 1 earth)
or else 10 children (2 iron, 2 fire,
or else 3 useful children
or else 6 children (1 iron, 2 earth,2 fire,
but only 1 useful child (1 wood).
or else 4 children (2 wood, 1 fire, 1 iron),
or else 10 children (5 wood,
2 fire, 2 earth and 1 iron).
or else 12 children (3 fire,
2 water, 3 earth, 2 fire and 2 iron).
or else 8 children (1 water,
2 fire, 1 iron, 4 wood).
1 earth, 3 fire, 1 earth and 1 water).
(1 iron, 1 earth and 1 wood).
and 1 water), 2 of whom are useful.
1 of whom is useful



177
Divinations of natal horoscope
Bir4མའི་དབང་ཐང་འཕྲང་པའི་
ཀྱི་མཚན་ཉིད་
བསྟན་པ་ནི།
>
0
Plate 5, fig. 14 and Plate 6, fig.6
Prognostications concerning the five coincidences of son or daughter ending the family line (White Beryl, ff. 2126–213a)
It is said that a son or daughter born in a month or year when there are certain coincidences between the age, log-men and trigram of the
father and those of the mother will die prematurely, ending the family line. To determine the coincidences, the calculation begins from
the trigram Li and the log-men tiger in the case of males and from the trigram Kham and log-men monkey in the case of females. Then, for
example, when parents bring forth a son, and the father is aged twenty-four with the log-men earth ox and the trigram Zin, while the
mother is aged nineteen with the log-men tiger and trigram Dva, the prediction is that the boy will die prematurely or accidentally, end-
ing the family line. Similarly, when parents bring forth a daughter, and the father is aged eighteen with the log-men water sheep and tri-
gram Khon, while the mother is aged fifteen with the log-men horse and trigram Zin, it is predicted that the daughter will die prematurely
or accidentally, thus ending the family line. The full chart is given on Plate 5, fig. 18.
༧ག།
བྱའོའི་ལོ་གྲངས།
༄༅།ཕྱི་ལམ་ཆེན། ཁོ
༄༅།ནངས་པ།
བ་མའིལེ་གྲས། ༡༠
།ཕྱི་ལོག་མེན།།
།ནང་སང་ཁ།
།བཅས་བླ།
༣།ཕ་ལེ་གྲུས།
སྟེ་སྤྱི་ལོག་མེན།
ཕྱིན་ཡང་ཁ།
༈།མའི་ལ་གྲངས། དུས
1: བུ་ལག་ཡིན། རྒྱུ་
ནཔསྤཔཁ།
༈ ལེའི་རྐྱེན།
1:|:༣ རབས་ཆུང།
ནམགྲབསཚང༌།
༣ རབས་ཆད། སྐུ་
རབས་ཆུང།
༣ རབས་ཆད :
༣ རབས་རང། །
༣ག་ཡ<<ཤམ་རབས་ཆད།
༣གཡངཤམ་རསད།
༣་གཡངཤམ་རབས་ད།
ཀྱི་གསང་བ༌བས་བས་སྤུད།།
༼གཡའམ་རབས་ཆད། །
འགཡབས་བསམར།
གིས་ག
སང་་་་
Plate 5, fig. 18
36
48
E0
72
Plate 5, fig. 18 (Ms I: ff. 20-21): Five coincidences of a son or daughter ending the family line (pho'i rabs-chad sgo Inga-dang mo'i rabs-chad sgo Inga)
If the age of the father is (pha'i lo-grangs) 24
The following defect of the year (lo'i skyon) is predicted
while his outer log-men is (phyi log-men) earth ox iron ox
water ox
wood ox
fire ox the son will bring an end to the family line (rabs chad)
and his inner trigram is (nang spar-kha) Zin
Khen
Zon
Khen
the son will bring an end to the family line (rabs chad)
Zon
27
35
43
51
the son will bring an end to the family line (rabs chad)
tiger
tiger
dog
the son will bring an end to the family line (rabs chad)
If the age of the mother is (ma'i lo-grangs)
while her outer log-men is (phyi log-men)
and her inner trigram is (nang spar-kha)
the natal month (btsas-zla) portends
19
tiger
Dva
death
horse
Dva
?
Dva
Dva
Dva
?
the son will bring an end to the family line (rabs chad)
the son will bring an end to the family line (rabs chad)
?95
30
42
54
66
the daughter will bring an end to the family line (gYang-gsham rabs-chad)
18
water sheep
Khon
wood sheep
fire sheep
earth sheep
iron sheep
the daughter will bring an end to the family line (gYang-gsham rabs-chad)
Gin
Gin
Khon
the daughter will bring an end to the family line (gYang-gsham rabs-chad)
If the age of the father is (pha'i lo-grangs)
while his outer log-men is (phyi log-men)
and his inner trigram is (nang spar-kha)
If the age of the mother is (mali lo-grangs)
while her outer log-men is (phyi log-men)
and her inner trigram is (nang spar-kha)
Khon
2331
39
47
the daughter will bring an end to the family line (gYang-gsham rabs-chad)
15
horse
Zin
tiger
horse
dog
the daughter will bring an end to the family line (gYang-gsham rabs-chad)
the daughter will bring an end to the family line (gYang-gsham rabs-chad)
Zin
Zin
Zin



178
The White Beryl
Prognostications concerning the five coincidences of inauspicious luck (White Beryl, f. 214a)
There are 101 predictions that can be made by deploying pebbles in relation to the elemental aspects of vitality, body, destiny and luck.
Each of these aspects is examined in terms of its five possible relationships: identity, mother, son, enemy and friend; and different out-
comes are suggested by the coincidence of white and black pebbles on these sectors.96 For example, if the pebble representing the iden-
tity-relationship of the vitality element is white, there will be long life, but if it is black the lifespan will be short.
On this basis the five coincidences of inauspicious luck can be examined. For example, if one's natal trigram is
Dva or Zin and the natal numeric square Red Seven or Blue Three, the birth coincides with a period of decline in vitality, particularly
when the element in an enemy-relationship with it is dominant. The prediction accordingly is that the child will die accidentally. On
Plate 5, fig. 19, all the five coincidences of inauspicious luck influencing the outcome of a child's birth are charted. If the inverse trigrams
and numeric squares appear, however, the predicted result is said to be auspicious.
། སྐྱེས་སྤར་ཁ།
༈ | སྐྱེས་སྨེ་བ།
།སྲོག་ལུས་དབང་ཐང༌།
༈ སྲེག་གུང་སྲོག་ལ་དགྲ་ །༈ ལུས་གུད་ལུསཀྱི་དགྲ་
༄༅།ཁ་དམར་རྡེལ་དཔྱད། །
སད་་ཀྱN པ་དུས་ཚས་པ།་ པར་དུས་བཙས་པ།
MIG
༈ །དབང་ཐང་གུད་ཅིང་དབང་ཐད། ༈ ལུས་གཔ་ལུས་ཀྱི་ངག
དགྲ་དང་དུས་སྐྱེས་པ། །དམ་དུས་བཙས་པ།
།ཀླུང་རྟགུང་ཀླུང་རྟའི་དགེ་
ད་དུས་བཙས་པ།
23
gwan
titesi
༄༅། འབྲས་བུ།
Plate 5, fig. 19
Plate 5, fig. 19 (Ms I: ff. 20–21): Five coincidences of inauspicious luck (ngan-klungs sgo-Inga)
If the natal trigram is (skyes spar-kha)
Dva; Zin
and the natal numeric square is
Red 2; Blue 3
Gin; Zon
Gin
Li; Khon; Khen
| Khon; Khen; Gin; Zon.
Black 2; Red 7/9
White 1/6/8
Black 2: Red 7/9
Green 4; Yellow 5
body element (lus), symbolised by wheel
destiny element (dbang) symbolised by svāstika
body element (lus) symbolised by wheel
luck element (klung), symbolised by lotus
(skyes sme-ba)
the following elemental aspects of vitality, body,
destiny (and luck] (srog-lus dbang-thang)
will be analysed by means of the following
predictive pebbles (kha-dmar rdel-dpyad)
vitality element (srog), symbolised
by crossed-vajra
the birth coincides with a decline in vitality,
the birth coincides with a decline in the body,
the birth coincides with a decline in destiny,
the birth coincides with a decline in body,
the birth coincides with a decline in luck,
while the element in an enemy-relationship
while the element in an enemy-relationship
while the element in an enemy-relationship
with the body element is flourishing
with the luck aspect is flourishing
with the vitality element is flourishing
(srog-gud srog-la dgra-dar-dus btsas-pa)
accidental death (gri-ru 'ch)
while the element in an enemy-relationship with
the destiny element is flourishing (dbang-thang
gud-cing dbang-thang dgra dar-dus skyes-pa)
destitution even if presently rich
while the element in an enemy-relationship
with the body element is flourishing
(lus gud lus-kyi dgra dar-dus btsas-pa) 97
ploughing without help
(lus-gud lus-kyi dgra dar-dus btsas-pa)
(klung-rta gud klung-rta'i dgra dar-gud btsas-pa)
portending the following predicted result ('bras-bu)
end of family line
ill-health eventually provoked by ill-luck associated
with dog-riding
Prognostications concerning birth according to the sectors of growth and decline in relation to the five relationships formed by the elemental aspects of vitality, body, destiny and luck (White Beryl, ff. 214b-221a)
The future status of a child is said to be determinable at birth by inspecting the conjunction of the twelve sectors of growth and decline
(dar-gud bcu-gnyis) with the vitality, body, destiny and luck elements of the new-born child, thereby forming relationships of identity,
mother, son, friend or enemy types (f. 216a/b).
The twelve sectors of growth and decline are divided into the six best categories (bzang-drug) and the six worst
categories (ngan-drug), each of which has three graded subdivisions, as explained above. 98 The sectors of clothing and growth are the
best of the best, those of birth and work are the mediocre of the best, and those of embryo and ablution are the worst of the best. The sec-
tors of conception and foetus are the best of the worst, those of tomb and ill-health are the mediocre of the worst, and those of death and
decline are the worst of the worst.
Predictions are then made for the conjunction of these six pairs of sectors with the vitality element, first in an
identity-relationship, followed by the mother-, son-, friend- and enemy-relationships. The same conjunctions are then made in respect of
the child's body, destiny and luck elements.99 For example, when the best of the best sectors of clothing and growth coincide with the
child's vitality element in an identity-relationship, the child is said to have supreme longevity. When the six best sectors are in a positive
mother-relationship with the child's vitality element the prediction is that the child will show gratitude to paternal relatives, but little
gratitude when in a negative mother-relationship. The full charts depicting these correspondences are found on Plate 5, fig. 20 and Plate
6, fig. 14, on the basis of the text entitled Dar-gud mig-tshags.



179
Divinations of natal horoscope
Tomb and III-health sectors; mediocre
Death and Decline sectors; worst of
worst category (shi-gud tha-ma
Conception and Foetus sectors; best
of worst category (dbugs-len
mngal-gnas ngan-gyi rab)
the child will nearly die in early life,
of worst category (dur-zhur na-ba
gnyis ngan-pa'i 'bring) the
Plate 5, fig. 20 (Ms I: ff. 22-24): Predictions of birth according to the sectors of growth and decline in relation to the four aspects of vitality, body, destiny and luck (White Beryl, ff. 2146–217a)
If the following sectors coincide with Clothing and Growth sectors; best Birth and Work sectors; mediocre
Embryo and Ablution sectors; worst of
the vitality element (srog)
of best category (gos-gyon dar-gnyis of best category (btsas-pa las-byed best category (lus-rdzogs khrus-byed
rab-kyi rab)
rab-kyi 'bring)
rab-kyi mtha')
the predicted results of birth pertaining the child will have longevity like peach the child will have long life and be
the child will be impervious to the threats
to the vitality element are as follows treasures of long life arrayed on trees, endowed with unimpeded resources, of demons, like a hard ball of iron; and
exhausting the resources of parents like a steadfast mountain.
there will be no obstacles to long life,
and siblings, as if brandishing a sword
which will resemble a continuous
gnyis ngan-pa'i mtha)
child will have an average lifespan,
the child will have a weak lifespan,
but live an average lifespan.
susceptible to cold diseases,
prone to ingressing primordial bewitchers
as if wounded by weapons.
(ye-'brog), and it will be important to
perform longevity rites.
over them.
stream of water.
Clothing and Growth sectors;
Birth and Work sectors;
Embryo and Ablution sectors;
Conception and Foetus sectors;
Tomb and III-health sectors;
Death and Decline sectors;
If the following sectors coincide with
the body element (lus)
best of best category
mediocre of best category
best of worst category
mediocre of worst category
worst of worst category
worst of best category
(lus-rdzogs khrus-byed rab-kyi mtha)
(gos-gyon dar-gnyis rab-kyi rab)
(btsas-pa las-byed rab-kyi 'bring)
(shi-gud tha-ma gnyis ngan-pa'i mtha)
(dur-zhur na-ba gnyis ngan-pa'i 'bring)
the child will be prone to many diseases,
the child will have the treasure of body,
the child will be handsome and hold
the child will be in constant pain, sighing
the predicted results of birth pertaining
to the body element are as follows
the child will be able-bodied, strong
and subject to few ailments, but
(dbugs-len mngal-gnas ngan-gyi rab)
the child will be subject to ill-health from
childhood, particularly to degenerating
rare diseases and cold disorders.
its head high, like a lotus flower.
like a worm-eaten radish. Many Bon or
and subject to many diseases.
like a turquoise gem, and exhaust the
resources of siblings, as if cutting
experience homesickness.
Buddhist rites should be performed
a willow tree with a sickle.
at all times.
Clothing and Growth sectors;
Birth and Work sectors;
Embryo and Ablution sectors;
Conception and Foetus sectors;
Tomb and III-health sectors;
Death and Decline sectors;
If the following sectors coincide with the
destiny element (dbang-thang)
best of best category
mediocre of best category
best of worst category
middling of worst category
worst of worst category
(btsas-pa las-byed rab-kyi 'bring)
worst of best category
(lus-rdzogs khrus-byed rab-kyi mtha)
the child will be wealthy, as if having
(dbugs-len mngal-gnas ngan-gyi rab)
(dur-zhur na-ba gnyis ngan-pa'i 'bring)
(shi-gud tha-ma gnyis ngan-pa'i mtha)
the child will be comfortable and
the child will always use his or her wealth.
the child will always lose its wealth.
the child will constantly be impoverished,
the predicted results of birth pertaining to
the destiny element are as follows
(gos-gyon dar-gnyis rab-kyi rab)
the child will be manifestly wealthy, like
a hoisted flag, and own many cattle of
high quality, as if his cattle were born
visited a treasure island.
"giving away what is in the mouth with the
endowed with prosperity, as if
bringing warmth to the land,
tongue' and 'that which is in the hand
in the grasslands.
happy in later life.
through the door'.
Clothing and Growth sectors;
Birth and Work sectors;
Embryo and Ablution sectors;
Conception and Foetus sectors;
Tomb and III-health sectors;
Death and Decline sectors;
If the following sectors coincide with
the luck element (klung-rta)
best of best category
mediocre of worst category
mediocre of best category
(btsas-pa las-byed rab-kyi 'bring)
the child will be eloquent, befriended
worst of best category
(lus-rdzogs khrus-byed rab-kyi mtha')
the child will accomplish all things,
best of worst category
(dbugs-len mngal-gnas ngan-gyi rab)
the child will dislike bad persons and
worst of worst category
(shi-gud tha-ma gnyis ngan-pa'i mtha)
(gos-gyon dar-gnyis rab-kyi rab)
the child will be a living treasure of
admiration, like gold bedecked by
(dur-zhur na-ba gnyis ngan-pa'i 'bring)
the predicted results of birth pertaining
the child will be censured for squandering
the child will be subject to scandals and
to the luck element are as follows
by the high and mighty, and
like a fox eating a tiger's heart.
be kind to good persons.
food and drink, and will be harmed
rumours at home and abroad.
resplendent as a calm painted tiger.
when trying to help
turquoise, and have a solid reputation
like a hut fashioned of iron.
༈ སེབ།
༧གོས་གྱོན་པགཞིས་རབ gབཙས་པ་ལས་བྱང་བབ་
།ལུས་རྫོགས་ཕྲས་བྱང་རབp R།དབུགས་ལེན་མངལ་གནས་
།ར་ཞུའན་བ་གཉིས་ན་པའིབྲིང༌། གཞི་ཐུང་ཐམ་གཉིས་ན་པའི་ཐ།
akaze
KUIMA
ལུས་རྫོགས་ཁྲུས་བྱང་
AN AAK
mamu
རྟ་དབུགས་ལེན་མངལ་གནས་
LA
དང་ཞུན་བ་གཉིས་ངན་པའབྲིང་། | ཤི་གུང་ཐ་མགཉིས་ངན་པའི་ཐ།
N
gunit ang
།དབང་ཐང་།
གོས་གྱོན་དང་གཉིས་དང་བའི་ཕབ། ༈བས་པ་ལས་བྱེད་པབགྱི་འཕྲོ་
1982
ཡས་འགར་ལ་གབྲས་ངན་པའི་བུ་
ཞབར་སྙོབ་གནས་
འབྲི༌།
ཤི་གུར་ཐ་མགཉིས་ན་པའི་ཐ།
ET
PALA
hའཁུབས་ན་ལས
རྣལུས་རྫོགས་ཁྲུས་བྱེད་པབ་ཀྱི་ཐ།
༣དབུགས་ལེར་མངལ་གནས་ན་པའིབ།
ལྡང་ཞུགསན་པ་གཉིས་ན་པའི་འབྲིང་།
| ཤི་གུང་ཐམའ་ཐམ། །
14h
Plate 5, fig. 20



:
1:|:
་
་་་་
པ
མར་
།
ལུས་གྲགས་བཟང་བ་དྲུག། ལུས་ཀྱི་གྲོགས་དན་དྲུག
བར་གྲོགས་བཟང་དྲུག། དབང་གྲོགས་དན་དྲུག།
1:|:
ཕྱིར་
།
2
པར་
་་་
ས་
མ་་་་་་་
ཀྱི་ རྒྱུ བ
པ་
ནམ
་་་
ས་གནས་
། ་
་་་་་
ས་
ས་་་་་་་་་་་
་
པ་
མ་
་་་
་
་་་
་
ན་
ས་ལ་
།
ས
་
་་་་
་་ན་་
ན་
ན་
་
ས
，
ཀྱི་
།
ན་
་
་་་
།



181
Divinations of natal horoscope
Plate 6, fig. 14 (Ms l: ff. 25-28): Predictions of birth according to the sectors of growth and decline in relation to the four aspects of vitality, body, destiny and luck (continued from Plate 5, fig. 20; White Beryl, ff. 217a-219a)
The Six Best Categories in
The Six Worst Categories in
The Six Best Categories in
The Six Worst Categories in
The Six Best Categories in
Mother-Relationship with Vitality
The Six Worst Categories in
Mother-Relationship with Vitality
The Six Worst Categories in
Son-Relationship with Vitality
The Six Best Categories in
Friend-Relationship with Vitality
Son-Relationship with Vitality
Friend-Relationship with Vitality
Enemy-Relationship with Vitality
Enemy-Relationship with Vitality
(srog-ma bzang-ba drug)
(Srog-bu bzang-ba drug)
(Srog-dgra bzang-ba drug)
(Srog-dgra ngan-pa drug)
(Srog-ma ngan-pa drug)
portend the child will seldom
(srog-bu ngan-pa drug)
portend the child will seldom
(srog-grogs ngan-pa drug)
portend the child will become
portend the child will be
(srog-grogs bzang-ba drug)
portend the child will become
an expert cattle-herder.
portend the child will bring
portend the child will
portend the child will die
good-mannered, showing
associate with paternal relatives
good fortune to siblings.
associate with siblings and bring
a poor cattle-herder.
die accidentally.
an extremely violent death.
gratitude to paternal relatives.
and show little gratitude.
little fortune to them.
The Six Best Categories in
The Six Worst Categories in
The Six Best Categories in
The Six Best Categories in
The Six Worst Categories in
The Six Worst Categories in
Mother-Relationship with Body
(lus-ma ngan-drug)
The Six Best Categories in
Son-Relationship with Body
The Six Worst Categories in
Friend-Relationship with Body
Mother-Relationship with Body
Son-Relationship with Body
Friend-Relationship with Body
Enemy-Relationship with Body
Enemy-Relationship with Body
(lus-kyi ma bzang-drug)
(lus-bu bzang-drug)
(lus-bu ngan-drug)
(lus-grogs bzang-drug)
(lus-grogs ngan-drug)
(lus-dgra bzang drug)
(lus-dgra ngan drug)
portend the child will show great
portend the child will have scant
portend the child will be intelligent.
portend the child will be hard to
portend a son will be hard to raise,
portend a son will surpass his parents
portend a son will have a
dominant wife, and a daughter
portend a son will have a wife
of low fortune, and a daughter
gratitude to maternal relatives.
regard for maternal relatives.
raise, with many wants or excesses.
while a daughter will have a
and have many children, while a
will have fortunate children.
will have more daughters than sons.
husband of good fortune.
daughter will get divorced.
The Six Best Categories in
The Six Worst Categories in
The Six Worst Categories in
The Six Worst Categories in
The Six Best Categories in
Son-Relationship with Destiny
The Six Worst Categories in
Son-Relationship with Destiny
The Six Best Categories in
Friend-Relationship with Destiny
The Six Best Categories in
Enemy-Relationship with Destiny
Mother-Relationship with Destiny
Mother-Relationship with Destiny
Friend-Relationship with Destiny
Enemy-Relationship with Destiny
(dbang-ma bzang-drug)
(dbang-ma ngan-drug)
(dbang-bu bzang-drug)
(dbang-bu ngan-drug)
(dbang-grogs bzang-drug)
(dbang-grogs ngan-drug)
(dbang-dgra bzang drug)
(dbang-dgra ngan drug)
portend the child will have a
portend the child will have an
portend the child will have a
portend the child will have an
portend the child will have great
portend the child will have poor
portend the child will incur
portend the child will incur little
wise and helpful sister.
estranged and unhelpful sister.
helpful daughter
unhelpful daughter of low destiny.
harvests and need loyal servants
harvests, inferior servants, and
great loss of wealth.
loss of wealth.
to manage the household.
a loud-mouthed wife.
The Six Best Categories in
The Six Best Categories in
The Six Best Categories in
The Six Worst Categories in
The Six Worst Categories in
Mother-Relationship with Luck
The Six Best Categories in
Son-Relationship with Luck
(klung-bu bzang-drug
The Six Worst Categories in
Son-Relationship with Luck
Friend-Relationship with Luck
Enemy-Relationship with Luck
Mother-Relationship with Luck
(klung-ma bzang-drug)
Enemy-Relationship with Luck
The Six Worst Categories in
Friend-Relationship with Luck
(klung-grogs ngan-drug)
portend the child will not enjoy
(klung-bu ngan-drug)
(klung-grogs bzang-drug)
(klung-dgra ngan drug)
(klung-ma ngan-drug)
portend the child will be bad to
(klung-dgra bzang drug)
portend the child will always be
portend the child will be good to
portend the child will become
portend the child will enjoy
portend the child will neither fear
paternal relatives and parents.
paternal relatives and parents,
a soldier.
portend the child will have
average opportunities
(sgo 'bring).
travelling and have many
travelling and have few
subjected to foes and accusations.
nor heed what it is told.
and so forth.
business associates.
business associates
སྲོག་མ་བཟང་བ་དྲུག།
སྲོག་མ་ངན་པ་དྲུག།
སྲོག་མ་བཟང་བ་དྲུག།
སྲོག་བུ་ངན་པ་དྲག་
སྲོག་གྲོགས་བཟང་དྲུག།
སེགོ་གྲོགས་ངན་དྲུག།
ཡིག་དག་བའང་དྲག་
སྲོག་དགྲ་ངན་དྲུག། །
ལུས་ཀྱི་མ་བཟང་དྲུག།
ལས་མ་དན དུབ
ལས་བྱ་བཟང་དབ
ལས་བུ་ངན་དྲུག་
ལུས་གྲོགས་བཟང་བ་དྲུག། ལུས་ཀྱི་གྲོགས་རིན་དྲུག
ལུས་དག་བལདདྲབ།
བྲས་དགྲ་ངན་དྲུག།
བར་མ་བཝང་དྲ།
དབང་མ་
དབང་བུ་བཟང་དྲུག།
དབར་བུ་ངན་དྲག།
བར་གྲོགས་བཟང་དྲུག།
དབར་གྲོགས་
དབང་དགྲ་པཟང་དྲུག།
དབར་དགྲ་ངན་དྲུག།
TY
ཀློང་མ་བཟང་དྲུག།
ཀློང་མ་ངན་དྲག།
ཀླུང་བུ་བཟང་དྲུག། ༽
ཀླུང་བུ་ངན་དྲུག། །
ཀླུང་གྲོགས་བཟང་དྲུག།
ཀླུང་གྲོགས་དན་དྲུག།
ཀླུང་དགྲ་བཟང་དྲུག།
ཀླུང་དགྲ་ངན་དྲུག་
Plate 6, fig. 14
Opposite Detail of Plate 6, fig. 14, showing the categories of birth
in a friend-relationship with the vitality, body and destiny elements



182
The White Beryl
is
རརྒྱུད་རྣམས་
120DUBURTON
CANOS
2012
LOM
AVONO
Ania
1
911
1
IEDZINLO
UMS
EN
Sön
Eccccd
id 11:00
TE
Plate 6, fig. 5
Death (shi-ba)
Tomb (dur-zhugs)
III-health (na-ba)
has the following
four similes,
Plate 6, fig. 5 (Ms I: ff. 25–30): Similes indicative of the twelve sectors of growth and decline in relation to vitality, body, destiny and luck elements (White Beryl, ff. 2146-215b)
Symbolic forms of the Growth (dar-ba) Clothing (gos) Birth (btsas-pa) Foetus (lus-rdzogs) Ablution (khrus) Work (las-byed) Conception (dbugs-
sectors of Growth and has the following has the following has the following has the following has the following has the following len) has the
Decline (dar-rgud four similes, four similes, four similes, four similes, four similes, four similes, following four
rnams-kyi gzugs)
called 'four
called 'four
called 'four
called 'four
called 'four called 'four similes, called
treasures
sustenances resources
comforts
wish-fulfilments continuities' 'four cessations
(gter-bzhi) (gso-thub bzhi) (longs-spyod bzhi) (bde-Idan bzhi) (bsam-grub bzhi) (rgyun-rim bzhi) of fortune
(skal-zad bzhi)
Vitality element, tree of longevity flow of river
temple on steadfast crossed vajra vajra or iron ball waterfall (chu-bo crushed flower
symbolised by
(tshe'i gter ljon-shing (chu-bo'i
mountain (mi-'gyur (tshe-srog bsra) (Icags-kyi sran-ma) gzhung-chen 'bab-pa) bouquet (me-tog
crossed vajra
gram-legs)
gzhung-chen) brtan-pa'i ri-bo)
tshom-bu bcoms-pa)
Embryo
Decline (gud)
(mngal-gnas) has the following
has the following four similes,
four similes, called 'four
called 'four separations'
great misfortunes' (bye-bral bzhi)
called 'four
calamities'
has the following has the following
four similes, four similes,
called 'four
called 'four
losses of luck interruptions'
(phyva-nyams bzhi) (rgyun-chad bzhi)
('phung-gyod bzhi)
(byur-chen bzhi)
throwing boulders
from a mountain top
insects at the
season's end (nam-
committing suicide
(rang-gibzu-bas
ice cutting through
vajra (khyag-pa'i
rdo-rje bcag-pa)
tree rotten at roots
(sdong-po rtsa-ba
(ri-gzar rtse-nas
zla zad-pa'i 'bod-ma)
rang-bkon)
rul-ba)
rbab-btang)
Body element,
cutting a willow-tree
flower (me-tog)
wish-granting tree
lotus flower
flourishing tree
flowers smitten by
worm-eaten radish
flies contaminating
colour diminished
great strength
(shed-mo-che)
fish and frogs
emerging on dry land
dog or goat falling in
ash-pit (khyi-ra thal-
symbolised by wheel
with a sickle (cug-
(dpag-bsam
(me-tog padma)
(sdong-po yal-mgal
frost (me-tog
(la-phug srin-gyis
khyer-ba)
gold paint (sbrang-bu
gser-rtsis zin-pa)
by sunshine
(kha-dog nyi-mas
phran zor-gyis btab)
sdong-po)
rgyas-pa)
sad-kyis bsad-pa)
I skam-la
dong bor-ba)
Destiny element,
treasure with flagpole
waves of an ocean of
flies gathering
fox eating tiger's
prosperity
(longs-spyod 'phel
skin placed in flames
gdungs-pa)
seeing mirages or
castles in the sky
bton-pa)
bird picking grain
(sgum-bu bya-yis
bzhus-ba)
deer meeting dog (sha-
khyi rang-la babs-pa),
symbolised by
in front (zas-nor gter
gems (nor-rdzas rgya-
ten deer emerging at
close range (sha-bcu
drung-nas phyung-ba)
whatever there is,
fetching gems from
a treasure-island,
a painted striped tiger,
and pearl necklace
heart (va-yis
(skyid-kar me-Icer
bzhag-pa) = loss of
svāstika
mdun-na ba-dan)
mtsho'i rba-rlabs)
stag-snying zos-ba)
or a mouse squeaking
dri-za grong-khyer
however little ('bong-
tshad bsags-pa'i
'bong-ma)
flies swarming at the
end of autumn
(nam-mjug zad-pa'i
sbrang-bu), or a bowl
kept by a dog (sder-
ma khyis 'dags-pa)
having entered a
(mthong-ba)
wealth
murderous trap (byi-
ba 'dzol-'og shib)
painted tiger
reliance on the wise
enjoyment of gold
blind man scattering
chaff covering a
saddle slipping from
water-hole under a cave
rainbow fading from
sun setting in the sky
Luck element,
symbolised by lotus
gold bedecked with
turquoise (gser-gYus
gold necklace
(gser-gyi dra-ba)
pitching a splendid
tent (mdzangs-kyi
(stag-gi ri-mo)
(mdzangs-la-brten)
or wealth (rin-chen
ox-tails (long-ba
(nyi-ma kmkha'-la
a horse ('og-rta
sga-bros byas-pa)
(phug-ma'i'og-gi chu-
dong), or partiality to
the east ('ja'-tshon
shar-nas yal-ba)
spras-pa), or bird
crack in the ground
(sbur-ba bar-gseng
"thums-pa)
gser-la spyod-pa)
gur-khyim phub-pa
glang-mjug stor-ba)
eating lungs but finding
rushing into water
(bye'u chu-larub-pa)
nub-pa), or gold and
iron dust mixed
together (gser-dang
Icags-phye 'dres-pa)
only empty intestines
filled with air (glo-gtad
rgyu-ma phus gtab)



183
Divinations of natal horoscope
2020
ch
CO 202a
UN
MA
ག་ང་
A series of similes (White Beryl, ff. 2145–215b) graphically illustrates the twelve sectors of growth and decline in relation to the four
aspects of vitality, body, destiny and luck, as depicted on Plate 6, fig. 5. Among these, growth (dar-ba) has four similes, called four treas-
ures' (gter-bzhi); clothing (gos) has four similes, called four 'sustenances' (gso-thub bzhi); birth (btsas-pa) has four similes, called four
‘resources' (longs-spyod bzhi); embryo (lus-rdzogs) has four similes, called four 'comforts' (bde-ldan bzhi); ablution (khrus) has four similes,
called four 'wish-fulfilments’ (bsam-grub bzhi); work (las-byed) has four similes, called four ‘long-lasting continuities' (rgyun-rim bzhi);
conception (dbugs-len) has four similes, called four ‘cessations of good fortune' (skal-zad bzhi); foetus (mngal-gnas) has four similes, called
four 'great misfortunes' (byur-chen bzhi);100decline (gud) has four similes, called four ‘separations' (bye-bral bzhi); ill-health (na-ba) has four
similes, called four ‘calamities' ('phung-gyod bzhi); death (shi-ba) has four similes, called four ‘losses of luck' (phyva-nyams bzhi); and tomb
(dur-zhugs) has four similes, called four ‘interruptions' (rgyun-chad bzhi).
Now, when the predicted results pertaining to the sectors of growth and decline are considered (White Beryl,
f. 215b) there are five possible outcomes, as depicted on Supplementary Plate 16, fig. 7. The prediction known as 'backward luck' (klung-
rta'i rgyab), which is recognised in the sectors of ill-health, death and decline, portends that a child will be prone to disease and hard to
raise, provoking the animosity of friend and stranger alike. The prediction known as 'void luck' (klung stongs-pa), which is recognised in
the sectors of tomb, conception and foetus, portends that there will be great losses and that however much the child tries to till the fields
there will be no contentment. The prediction known as the 'flourishing of the enemy aspect of the luck elemenť (klung-rta dgra-dar) por-
tends that the child will doubt the possibility of success, and then, when travelling, will encounter enemies. The prediction known as 'for-
ward luck' (klung-rta mdun), which is recognised in the sectors of embryo, birth and ablution, portends that the child will be easy to raise,
unharmed by impediments, and will be liked by all for its skill and renown. Lastly, the prediction known as “established forward luck’
(klung-rta mdun-tshugs), which is recognised in the sectors of work, clothing and growth, portends the most auspicious outcome.



184
The White Beryl
Plate 16, fig. 7
ཀླུ་རོ་ས་ས་ ་
©་་༢་དགྲ་དར་ཀྱང་ལྔ་བད ན
ད
ང་ཐ་ཡ་ཤg3
NON
Plate 16. fig. 7 (Ms II: ff. 4-5): Prognostications concerning nativity luck in relation to the sectors of growth and decline (White Beryl, f. 215b)
The prediction known as
The prediction known as
The prediction known as
'backward luck' (klung-rta'i rgyab)
The prediction known as
'forward luck' (klung-rta mdun)
'void luck' (klung stongs-pa)
the 'flourishing of the enemy aspect of
the luck element' (klung-rta dgra-dar)
[not referred to in White Beryl
The prediction known as
'established forward luck'
(klung-rta mdun-tshugs)
work, clothing and growth
which is recognised in the
ill-health, death and decline
tomb, conception and foetus
embryo, birth and ablution
sectors of (ngos-'dzin)
predicts the following result ('bras-bu)
portends that a child will be prone to disease and
portends that there will be great losses and
portends that the child will be easy to raise,
portends the most auspicious outcome.
hard to raise, provoking the animosity of friend
however much the child tries to till the fields
portends that the child will doubt the
possibility of success, and encounter enemies
while travelling.
unharmed by impediments, and will be
and stranger alike.
there will be no contentment.
appreciated by all for its skill and renown.
When all the aforementioned calculations have been made, contrasting the twelve sectors of growth and decline with each one of the
five relationships formed with the child's vitality, body, destiny and luck elements, and determining whether the pebbles employed
are black or white, a collective tally of the pebbles is then made (f. 219a/b). If the birth of the child coincides with all six inauspicious sec-
tors of decline the child will not fear whatever is said and will not listen; but if the birth coincides with all six auspicious sectors, there will
constantly be enemies and accusations, while enemies will turn out to be friends, for which reason one should persevere with the rite
known as dgra-sri dgra-sgrub.
Then, as depicted on Supplementary Plate 16, fig. 11, if the four mother-relationships represented by the vitality,
body, destiny and luck elements are all white (ma-bzhi dkar-po), it portends that the paternal ancestors will flourish and the child will
have a well-educated family background. Conversely, if the four mother-relationships are black (ma-bzhi nag-po), it portends that the
paternal ancestors will decline, and the child will show the father little gratitude and will have to seek an outside supporter. Then, if the
mother-relationship pebbles are half black and half white (dkar-nag phyed), it portends that the paternal ancestors will endure great ups
and downs. If all the four pebbles representing the vitality, body, destiny and luck elements are white (srog-lus dbang-klung rdel dkar), it
portends that the child will be respected by others, endeavours will be successful, and the child will be an independent thinker. However,
if these four pebbles are predominantly black (rdel-nag mang-ba), it portends that merits will diminish from the east. It will be better if the
child adopts Buddhism as a support, but it will have to serve others. If all four son-relationship pebbles are white (bu-bzhi dkar-ba), it por-
tends that the child will be better than the father and can maintain the ancestral home. However, if all four son-relationship pebbles are
black (bu-bzhi nag-pa), it portends that the child will be hard to raise and will be unsuccessful in life. Then, if the son-relationship pebbles
are half black and white (bu-bzhi dkar-nag phyed), it portends that only half the children can be raised.
If all four friend-relationship pebbles are white (grogs-bzhi dkar-ba), it portends that the child's share of wealth
and food will be great, likened to the drawing of a tiger; whereas if they are black (grogs-bzhi nag-pa) it portends that there will be ups
and downs, living from hand to mouth, and if they are half black and half white (grogs-bzhi phyed-ma), it portends that the child will
be of average wealth, neither truly rich nor truly poor. If the pebbles representing vitality coincide with the sectors of growth and those
representing the enemy-relationship with the sectors of decline (srog-dar dgra-gud), it portends good auspices; the same applies when the
pebbles representing the body, destiny or luck elements have such a coincidence. Conversely, if the pebbles representing vitality and so
forth coincide with the sectors of decline and those representing the enemy-relationship with the sectors of growth (srog-gud dgra-dar),
there will be an accidental death. Similar outcomes are predicted if the pebbles representing the body, destiny or luck elements have
such a negative coincidence.
Opposite Detail of Plate 16, fig. 7, showing the predictions known
as 'flourishing of the enemy aspect of the luck element', 'forward
luck' and 'established forward luck'



186
The White Beryl
Plate 16, fig. 11
DER
duracing
177rigagu
qar 4199
སྤྱིནམ་དཀར་:
građantra
༦
Plate 16, fig. 11 (Ms II: ff. 1-5): Prognostications concerning the collective tally of the pebbles representing the relationships between the child's vitality, body, destiny and luck elements and the twelve sectors of growth and
If all four pebbles
decline (dar-gud rdel-gyi 'doms-dpyad, White Beryl, f. 219a/b)
If the four pebbles If the four pebbles If the pebbles
representing the representing these representing these
mother-relationships mother-relationships mother-relationships
of the vitality, body, are all black
are half black and
destiny and luck (ma-bzhi nag-po) half white (dkar-nag
elements are all white
phyed)
(ma-bzhi dkar-po)
If the four pebbles
representing the
vitality, body, destiny
and luck elements are
all white (Srog-lus
dbang-klung rdel dkar)
If these four pebbles
are predominantly
black (rdel-nag
mang-ba)
If all four pebbles
representing
son-relationships
are white (bu-bzhi
representing son-
relationships are black
(bu-bzhi nag-pa)
dkar-ba)
it portends that the paternal
it portends that the paternal
it portends that the paternal
it portends that the child will
it portends that merits will
it portends that the child will
it portends that the child will
ancestors will flourish and
ancestors will decline, and
ancestors will endure
be respected by others,
diminish from the east. It
be better than the father
be hard to raise and will be
the child will have a well-
the child will show the father
great ups and downs.
endeavours will be
will be better if the child
and can maintain the
unsuccessful in life.
educated family background. little gratitude and will have
successful, and the child
adopts Buddhism as a
ancestral home
to seek an outside supporter.
will be an independent
support, but he or she will
thinker.
have to serve others.
Prognostications concerning the seven model children of superior, average and inferior types, according to the gSang-ba Yang-tig (White Beryl, ff. 2196–221a)
The text known as the Further Secret Point (gSang-ba Yang-tig) enumerates twenty-one types of children who are grouped into superior,
average and inferior types, as depicted on Supplementary Plate 16, fig. 8. Among them, the seven superior types are respectively known
as follows: (1) The ‘naturally born superior child' (rang-bzhin chags) is born in the early evening or early morning in the waxing phase of
the lunar month, under an auspicious planet and constellation, untainted by bad luck, and with a year-sign suggesting that the child will
be sustained by its father and a month-sign suggesting it will be supported by its mother. (2) The ‘child which has found a fortunate fam-
ily' (las-can rigs-rnyed) will have auspicious faculties resulting from the time of birth at the new moon and when the constellation is fully
risen, and this is said to indicate auspicious past actions and deeds. (3) The ‘child of spontaneously achieved meriť (bsod-nams lhun-grub)
has an auspicious accumulation of past acts, an exuberant destiny, and has accrued glory despite wrong-doings. (4) The ‘child which sus-
tains the elements' ('byung-ba gso-bskyed) will have elements which do not fall into inauspicious relationships, and are free from hostile,
adversarial aspects, and seventh-removed year aspects (bdun-zur), with a year-sign and month-sign which are uninhibited, and devoid of
the cutting influence of demons in respect of trigram and numeric square. (5) The child which has a family endowed with auspicious coin-
cidences' (rten-'brel rus-pa'i bu) is one whose mother is rich, lacking in hostile or adversarial aspects, uninhibited in respect of trigram and
numeric square, and free from inauspicious planetary forces or spirit lords of the soil. (6) The ‘child which associates with most glorious
gods and spirits' (dpal-chen lha-'dre'i bu) is one to whom offerings are made by fierce gods and spirits, and although the male spirits (pho-
lha) 101 ingress upon the paternal ancestors, causing reversals and turbulent dreams, the luck of the subject remains auspicious without the
need for divination. (7) The ‘child which has long life endowed with intelligence' (rigs-can tshe-yi bu) has a birth compatible with divine
glory and coincident with auspicious omens, at sunrise during the mid-period of the month, for which reason its actions will be auspicious.



187
Divinations of natal horoscope
stacin og
đưa nó
971(acas
Gur-
Jainko
10
19
žaligir
facov
Jak
Ja93
If the pebbles
If the pebbles
If the pebbles
If the four pebbles
representing friend
If the four pebbles
representing friend-
representing the
representing
son-relationships
are half black and
If the pebbles
representing the
vitality element
coincide with the
If the pebbles
representing friend-
relationships are half
black and half white
(grogs-bzhi phyed
relationships are all
white (grogs-bzhi
dkar-ba)
If the pebbles
representing the
body element
coincide with the
sectors of growth,
relationships are all
black (grogs-bzhi
If the pebbles
representing the
destiny element
coincide with the
sectors of growth,
If the pebbles
representing the
body element
luck element
If the pebbles
representing the
vitality element
coincide with the
sectors of decline,
If the pebbles
representing the
destiny element
coincide with the
sectors of decline,
representing the
luck element
coincide with the
coincide with the
coincide with the
half white (bu-bzhi
nag-pa)
sectors of growth,
sectors of growth,
sectors of decline,
sectors of decline,
dkar-nag phyed)
-ma)
and those
and those
and those
and those
and those
and those
and those
and those
representing the
representing the
enemy-relationship
with the sectors of
decline (lus-dar
representing the
enemy-relationship
with the sectors of
representing the
enemy-relationship
with the sectors of
decline (srog-dar
dgra-gud)
it portends good
auspices for the vitality
representing the
enemy-relationship
with the sectors of
representing the
enemy-relationship
with the sectors of
growth (Srog-gud
dgra-dar)
enemy-relationship
with the sectors of
decline (dbang-dar
dgra-gud)
representing the
enemy-relationship
with the sectors of
decline (klung-dar
dgra-gud)
it portends good
representing the
enemy-relationship
with the sectors of
growth (dbang-gud
dgra-dar)
it portends poverty.
growth (lus-gud
dgra-dar)
growth (klung-gud
dgra-dar)
dgra-gud)
it portends that the child
it portends good
it portends there will be
it portends ill-health.
it portends defamation.
it portends that only half
the children can be
it portends that the child's it portends that there
share of wealth and food will be ups and downs,
will have an average
it portends good
auspices for the body
element, symbolised
auspices for the
auspices for the luck
an accidental death.
raised.
will be great, likened
and living from hand
wealth, neither truly
element, symbolised
destiny element,
element, symbolised
to the drawing of a tiger.
to mouth.
rich nor truly poor.
by the vajra
by the wheel
symbolised by the
by the lotus.
surmounted by the
and gem motif.
svāstika.
Sun/Moon symbol.
The seven average types are respectively known as follows: (1) The ‘child which obtains its own lifespan of its own accord (rang-tshe
rang-gis rnyed-pa) is not born at an inauspicious time, and so is naturally auspicious, protected by the guardian deities, unharmed by evil
spirits or diseases, liked and sustained by people, and will inherit the legacies of others. (2) The ‘child which obtains its own body in accor-
dance with its own past actions' (rang-lus rang-gis rnyed-pa),102 is well-built, with a navel cord resembling a meditation belt, fine hair, and
born during the night. (3) The ‘child which has a most glorious father' (dpal-chen pha-yi bu) is endowed with most glorious skilful means
and auspicious coincidences, able to receive the Buddhist teachings or empowerments and sustain the blessings, and, also known as a
‘child of the dākinīs', it will protect its father, since the luck aspect of its elements is not adverse. (4) The ‘child which has a supportive
mother' (rten-can ma-yi bu) is one devoid of all unfortunate luck aspects, its divine glory uninhibited by evil spirits and malevolent forces
(bdud). (5) The ‘child which has great athletic prowess' (rtsal-chen stobs-kyi bu) is born under a turbulent planetary conjunction, takes
delight in negative actions, associates with women of inauspicious background, and has a great but misdirected intelligence. (6) The ‘child
which is endowed with material wealth' (nor-can rdzas-kyi bu) will be wealthy, and have extensive business interests, friends and guests.
Though the child might fall it will land on its feet, and wealth like that of Vaisravana will be accrued. Bad reputation will be quelled and
enemies vanquished even if the child associates long with those of inauspicious background. (7) The ‘child endowed with the signs of
being supported’ (brten-pa rtags-kyi bu) is born when the elements are in a relationship of balance (khod-snyoms), and it will be supported by
its father and sustained with food, wealth and material resources, as well as by zhang-lha and female spirits (ma-lha). 103
The seven inferior types are respectively known as follows: (1) The ‘child beset by butchers and malevolent forces
(bshan-pa bdud-'bebs bu) is one of inauspicious birth, with an inhibited year-sign and month-sign, coinciding with enemy-relationships,
tomb-signs, and a triple planetary conjunction. (2) The ‘child which reverses into the depths of cyclic existence' ('khor-ba gting-nas log-pa)



188
The White Beryl
*(Caucazia
Hisya
<raggidan
Soorgrust
རུས་པ་
2004rbdil
dgn
fe
Plate 16, fig. 8
is born in conjunction with the nine inauspicious omens (ngan-dgu 'dzom),104 and with enemy or adversarial aspects. (3) The ‘child
whose place of birth is adverse in cyclic existence' (skye-gnas 'khor-ba ru-log) is born on Thursday or Friday, in conjunction with a
black month, a black body element, and the numeric square Black Two. (4) The ‘child endowed with the spear-wound and claw-marks of
an ogress' (mdung-shul srin-mo spar-rjes) is born in a fire month of a monkey year to a mother born in a tiger year, giving rise to inauspi-
cious omens. (5) The ‘child whose father is smitten by an ogre of ill-omen’ (ltas-ngan srin-po pha-gcod) is born disabled at noon or
midnight when the year-sign of the child oppresses that of the father, the month is in a seventh-removed bdun-zur aspect and the day in
an adversarial aspect. (6) The ‘child whose mother is smitten by a malignant ogress' (gnod-sbyin srin-mo ma-gcod) is one whose adver-
sarial year-sign oppresses the mother's natal year and month, and until death is unwell, lacking in wealth, and subject to both defama-
tion and accusations. (7) The ‘child whose own life is vanquished by an ogre' (srin-po rang-tshe rgyal) is one who should be cast aside at
birth because it is strongly inhibited by the parent's year and natal signs, slain by its own year-sign, and has its month, hour, planet
and constellation all in enemy-relationships.
The indications of the luck aspect associated with these superior, average and inferior types of child are clearly
depicted (Supplementary Plate 16, fig. 8). Among them, the superior type is specifically indicated by signs likened to the gemstones of the
gods and serpentine spirits. All that is needed or desired will emerge, the child will have long life, material wealth, great merit, a kind and
well-educated character, with good reputation; it will be raised as a child by friend and foe alike, and will be successful in Buddhist prac-
tice, prosperous and healthy. At birth the child will lie face-up, with the head to the north and the face to the west, with a high hair-line,
fine hair and a deep voice, the upper part of the body resembling a lion.
The average type of child is specifically indicated by signs likened to the material wealth of men and kings, and to
the sunlight appearing through the clouds of merit. In the first and middle parts of life the child will have material wealth likened to gold.
But, like a pool which is never emptied, there will be many sudden infectious diseases, and the child will not show gratitude, or else there
will be disability, many fatalities, incompatible foods will be stored together, and there will be bloodshed. Daughters will dispossess sons,
and at birth the child will face south with its head to the east, the head will be reddish like copper, the body thin, and the voice like that of a
donkey. The eyes will resemble flower-buds or the eyes of a mountain spirit (yaksa), and it will have a decrepit posture, as if the navel were
being eaten by the mouth!105 The child will curse the paternal relatives, be inimical to Buddhism and delight in negative actions, and will
be a liar associating with all sorts of inauspicious persons. There will be much loss of life among horses, donkeys and mules, and there will
be unanswered accusations.
Lastly, the inferior type of child is specifically one whose birth is indicated by physical disability, cleft palate, weak
voice, poor complexion, dark birth marks and moles. There will be rumours and demonic influences, and the child will be prone to child-
hood diseases. Property will be carried off by windstorms. During life there will be sorrows and disputations, insufficient food or drink,
the subject's actions will not be respected, and he or she will repeatedly move house. At birth, the child will lie face down, with a navel
cord resembling a sheep’s intestine. Eventually, the child will die accidentally as a homeless pauper, or else it will be afflicted by spirit
lords of the soil or leprosy. Even if the child has many sons the family line will come to an end, and family property will be divided, so that
there will be no happiness.



189
Divinations of natal horoscope
གསང་བ་ཡང་རིག་སས་ཐ་མའི་བུ་བདུན།
charanggar
yu q ori berinai Kibaragus
sorgt sanguigi
dsgudr Teltaratzen
(quine
savas
vat
ficara
asy
Plate 16, fig. 8 (Ms ll: ff. 1-5): Prognostications concerning the seven model children of superior, average and inferior types, according to the gSang-ba Yang-tig (White Beryl, ff. 2195–221a)
The 'child which has found a fortunate
The 'child of spontaneously achieved
The 'child which sustains the
The 'child which has a family
The 'child which associates with
The 'child which has long life endowed
The following seven model children of the superior
type, according to the Further Point of Secrets
The 'naturally born superior child'
(rang-bzhin chags)
family' (las-can rigs-rnyed)
merit' (bsod-nams lhun-grub)
elements' ('byung-ba gso-bskyed)
endowed with auspicious
with intelligence' (rigs-can tshe-yi bu)
most glorious gods and spirits'
(dpal-chen Iha-'dre'i bu)
(gSang-ba yang-tig-las bzang-dpe'i bu-bdun)
coincidences' (rten-'brel rus-pa'i bu)
have the following indications
The superior type is specifically indicated by signs likened to the gemstones of the gods and serpentine spirits (nāga). All that is needed or desired will emerge; the child will have long-life, material wealth, great merit, a kind and well-educated character, with good reputation; it will be
raised as a child by friend and foe alike, and will be successful in Buddhist practice, prosperous and healthy. At birth the child will be face-up, with the head to the north and the face to the west, with a high hair-line, fine hair and a deep voice, the upper part of the body resembling a lion
The seven following model children of the average
type, according to the Further Point of Secrets
(gsang-ba yang-tig-las 'bring-dpe'i bu-bdun)
have the following indications
The 'child which obtains its own The 'child which obtains its own body The 'child which has a most glorious The 'child which has a supportive The 'child which has great athletic The 'child which is endowed with The 'child endowed with the signs of
lifespan of its own accord'
through its own accord'
father' (dpal-chen pha-yi bu) mother' (rten-can ma-yi bų) prowess' (rtsal-chen stobs-kyi bu material wealth' (nor-can rdzas-kyi bu) being supported' (brten-pa rtags-kyi bu)
(rang-tshe rang-gis rnyed-pa) (rang-lus rang-gis rnyed-pa)
The average type of child is specifically indicated by signs likened to the material wealth of men and kings, and to the sunlight appearing through the clouds of merit. In the first and middle parts of life the child will have material wealth likened to gold. But, like a pool which is never emptied,
there will be many sudden infectious diseases, and the child will not show gratitude, or else there will be disability, many fatalities, incompatible foods will be stored together, and there will be bloodshed. Daughters will dispossess sons, and at birth the child will face south with its head to
the east, the head will be reddish like copper, the body thin, and the voice like that of a donkey. The eyes will resemble flower-buds or the eyes of a mountain spirit (yakṣa), and the physical posture will be decrepit, as if the navel were eating the mouth. The child will curse the paternal
The 'child whose own life is
The seven following model children of the inferior
type, according to the Further Point of Secrets
(gSang-ba yang-tig-las tha-ma'i dpe'i bu-bdun)
have the following indications
relatives, be inimical to Buddhism and delight in negative actions, and will be a liar associating with all sorts of inauspicious persons. There will be much loss of life among horses, donkeys and mules, and there will be unanswered accusations.
The 'child beset by butchers The 'child which reverses into The 'child whose place of birth is The 'child endowed with the spear. The child whose father is smitten The 'child whose mother is smitten
and malevolent forces'
the depths of cyclic existence' adverse in cyclic existence' wound and claw-marks of an ogress' by an ogre of ill-omen'
by a malignant ogress'
(bshan-pa bdud-'bebs bu)
('khor-ba gting-nas log-pa) (skye-gnas 'khor-ba ru-log) (mdung-shul srin-mo spar-rjes) (Itas-ngan srin-po pha-gcod) (gnod-sbyin srin-mo ma-gcod)
vanquished by an ogre'
(srin-po rang-tshe rgyal
The inferior type of child is specifically one whose birth is indicated by physical disability, cleft palate, weak voice, poor complexion, dark birth-marks and moles. There will be rumours and demonic influences, and the child will be prone to childhood diseases. Property will be carried off by
windstorms. During life there will be sorrows and disputations, insufficient food or drink, the subject's actions will not be respected, and he will repeatedly move house. At birth, the child will be face down, with a navel cord resembling a sheep's intestine. Eventually, the child will die
accidentally as a homeless pauper, or else it will be afflicted by spirit lords of the soil or leprosy. Even if the child has many sons the family line will come to an end, and family property will be divided, so that there will be no happiness.
Supplementary divinations concerning nativity luck (byis-pa btsas-klung rtsis, White Beryl, ff. 221a-223a)
Before this technique can be applied, one must first ascertain the resulting life-support associated with the vital energy (rlung)106 at the
moment when the consciousness of the child enters the womb. As depicted on Plate 16, fig. 9, the vital energy of the earth element (sa-
rlung) moves vertically from the central ‘pillar' or bridge of the nose (sna-'i ka-ba), the vital energy of the water element (chu-rlung) moves
in the direction of the upper lip, the vital energy of the wood element (shing-gi rlung) moves sideways from the nostrils, the vital energy of
Plate 16, fig. 9
the fire element (me-rlung) moves upwards from the nostrils, and the space which is an element inherent in each of the other elements,
gaidu
assisting each of them, is here identified with the vital energy of the iron element (lcags-rlung) because it has a particular affinity with the
father's family line. Consciousness may not enter the mother's womb except at times when both the father and mother have a balanced
vital energy sharing an identical element, and it is this which is to be recognised as the vital energy of the child's vitality (bu'i srog-rlung).
A
Plate 16, fig. 9 (Ms II: f. 1): Divinations concerning nativity luck (byis-pa btsas-klung rtsis, White Beryl, ff. 221a-223a)
The five types of vital energy that move through the nostrils (sna-bug-nas rgyu-ba'i rlung-rigs Inga)
The vital energy of the earth element (sa-rlung) moves vertically from the central 'pillar' or bridge of the nose (sna-' ka-ba)
The vital energy of the water element (chu-rlung) moves in the direction of the upper lip
The vital energy of the wood element (shing-gi rlung) moves sideways from the nostrils
The vital energy of the fire element (me-rlung) moves upwards from the nostrils
The vital energy of the iron element (Icags-rlung) is inherent in the space of the nasal cavity



190
The White Beryl
At that time the element in question should be compared with those of the year, month, day and hour of conception, each in terms of an
identity-, mother-, son-, friend- or enemy-relationship. This examination should be conducted when sexual intercourse first takes place
following the cessation of menstruation.
However, if that moment passes and the element in question is not recognised, one should know that the vital
energy of the child's life-essence or vitality element is also identical to whichever of the mother's five vital energies is in motion at the
time of the child's birth, and one should apply the divination process to determine identity-, mother-, son-, friend- or enemy-relation-
ships at that time. Alternatively, since the same element continues to be present within the mother's womb for up to 270 days
following conception and prior to the child's birth, the comparison may also be made during a specific hour, day, month and year
coinciding with that period.
However, if that moment passes and recognition has still not been made, one should know that the element asso-
ciated with that initial vital energy of the child's vitality element is also present in the characteristic elemental human types ('byung-ba'i
mi-rigs), which are discussed below in the context of the ‘pine-tree' divination technique concerning ill-health.107 As such, on Plate 16, fig.
10, the wood constitutional type is identified as an active person dressed in green, the fire constitutional type as a sedentary person
dressed in red, the iron constitutional type as an armour-clad soldier, the water constitutional type as a lover dressed in blue, and the
earth constitutional type as a sleeper.
varig
ngraica autori:
Kuradigo
SESE
SAVES
garco
Plate 16, fig. 10
Plate 16, fig. 10 (Ms Il: ff. 2–5) Recognition of the five elemental human types if the vitality is not recognised at conception, pregnancy or birth
If these five vital energies of the vitality are unrecognised (at the moments of conception, pregnancy or birth], one should recognise the five characteristic elemental human types
depicted below and contrast (the element in question with the appropriate hour, day, month and year] (Srog-rlung Inga'i ngos ma-zin-na 'byung-ba'i mi-rigs Inga'i ngos-'dzin 'thabs)
the following elements ('byung-ba)
wood
fire
iron
water
earth
have the following characteristic elemental
physically active person mentally active person armour-clad soldier lover dressed in blue sleeper dressed in yellow
human types ('byung-ba'i mi-rigs)
dressed in green dressed in red
Having identified the element in question by one means or another, the detailed methodology and predictions are given in White Beryl,
ff. 221a-223a.
Prognostications based on the destiny elements of four generations (White Beryl, f. 227a/b)
Lastly, there are techniques for predicting the future prosperity or otherwise of sons and grandsons, based on the coincidence of certain
sequences of destiny elements over four generations. For example, if the grandfather's destiny element is wood, the father's fire, the son's
earth and the grandson's earth, it is predicted that the family will have good fortune and achievements of long life, whereas if the grandfa-
ther's destiny element is fire, the father's is wood, the son's water, and the grandson’s iron, the family will experience misfortunes and the
family line will be interrupted within five generations. The full chart is given on Plate 6, fig. 15.
Plate 6, fig. 15 (Ms I: ff. 29–30): Predictions of family fortune based on the destiny elements of four generations
Grandfather's year element Father's year element Son's year element
(mes-po'i lo)
(pha'i lo)
(bu'ilo)
Grandson's year element
(tsha-ba'i lo)
Inspection of son and grandson's elements on basis of
father and grandfather's elements (pha-dang mes-po
gnyis-nas bu-dang tshar rtag)
good fortune, and achievement of long life (dpal-babs mi-la tshe-yi
wood
fire
earth
earth
water
water
earth
earth
dngos-grub thob)
fluctuating misfortune, and family line maintained by one person
(byur-babs 'phel-yang mi-'phel rabs-kyang mi char gcig brgyud 'dzin)
misfortune, and family line interrupted within five generations
(byur-babs mi-rabs Inga-la rabs chad)
misfortune, and children dying of post-natal fever
fire
wood
water
iron
earth
water
fire
iron
(rbyur-babs bu-tsha skyes-tshad 'ch)
water
earth
wood
iron
misfortune, short life, poor environment, and eventual ending of family
line (byur-babs tshe-thung 'khor-dbul tha-rab chad



ནང་
Above Detail of Plate 16, fig. 10 (see opposite), showing the
water constitutional type
མས་བོན་ལ། ཕའི་ལ།
བུའི། ཚདིའིལ།
ཕ་དང་མེས་པོ་གཉིས་ནས་བུ་དང་ཚར་བརྟག་
དཔལ་བབས་མི་ལ་ཚོས་དངོས་གྲུབ་ཐོབ།
བྱ་བབས་འཕེལ་ཡང་མི་འཕེལ་རབས་ཀྱང་མ་ཆདགཅིག་
བྱར་བབས་མ་རབས་ལྔ་ལ་རབས་ཆད།
བྱར་བབས་བུ་ཚོ་སྐྱེས་ཆོད་འཆི་
སྦྱར་བབས་ཚེ་ཐུང་འཁོར་དབུལ་ཐ་རབ་ཆད།
Plate 6, fig. 15



Divinations concerning marriage
ལྟས་ནའ
གསས་



བྱ་བྲལ་
ས་ན་སྐས་རིམ་ལ་རི
ན



194
The White Beryl
Divinations concerning marital prospects (Tib. bag-rtsis; Ch. gi-gong) may be made on the basis of three diverse systems of divinatory
chart: the hidden point of heaven, which utilises the eight trigrams (spar-brgyad gnam-gyi gab-tshe) to determine the degree of marital
compatibility; the hidden point of earth, which utilises the nine numeric squares (sme-dgu sa-yi gab-tshe) to determine the time for the
bride to set out on the road (lam-du 'jug-pa); and the hidden point of the offspring of heaven and earth, which utilises the twelve year-signs
(lo-skor bcu-gnyis sras-kyi gab-tshe) to determine remedial methods.
Compatibility determined through the hidden point
of heaven, utilising the eight trigrams
This system of divination determines the following calculations: the rejection of a partner who has been subjected to unlawful sex and the
selection of one of compatible year-sign (byi-spangs lo-gros sdeb-tshul); the recognition of the inauspicious and favourable natal year-signs
for a partner (lo-ngan-rung ngos-'dzin tshul); the individual elemental aspects and particular outcomes based on the destiny element
(rkyang-pa dbang-thang sgos-kyi 'bras); the nine permutated marriage calculations (khug-pa) and further permutated marriage calculations
(yang-khug); the importance of seniority (ni-sha); the collective tally of the elements (spun-grangs); the constitutional types of the parents
(pha-dang ma'i rus); the trigram indicative of the natal month (skyes-zla); luck aspects of the trigrams and numeric squares (spar-kha-dang
sme-ba'i klung); the sectors of growth and decline (dar-gud); and the opportune planets and constellations (khri-sgo gza'-skar). Through
this process, it is said that a man should come to understand the sorts of wife who are antagonistic (gnyan dgra'i chung-ma) and the partic-
ular consequences of such marriages.
Prognostications concerning the rejection of a bride subjected to unlawful sex and selection of one with a compatible year-sign (White Beryl, ff. 228b-230a)
Unlawful sex is said to comprise the 'white' incest occurring between maternal relatives, the 'black' incest occurring between paternal
relatives, and the ‘piebald’incest occurring between mother and son. Brides who have been subjected to such unlawful sex should be
rejected because they may bring disaster upon the family. However, if such a bride has to be accepted, one should perform the rituals
known as Srid-pa'i bla-sel chen-mo and Srid-pa rgyal-ba'i thing-sel.
It is of great importance to select a bride of compatible year-sign.' Those couples whose destiny elements both
form a kha-yan, khong-nong, se-zhig, kha-ral or 'dun-khur relationship should not get married to one another. For example, those whose
destiny elements both form a kha-yan relationship will have a physically disabled child, or else they will get divorced, have no children, or
only girls. In this way the family line will be interrupted. If such persons must get married, they should perform the thread-cross rite
known as bya-khyung gshog-bya and recite the Ratnakūța Sūtras. Among favourable marriages (Plate 7, fig. 5), a couple whose year-signs
are those of the mouse, dragon or bird form a loving compatible relationship (snying-nye mthun-pa), as do those of the mouse, ox or tiger;
those of the dog, pig or hare; those of the bird, monkey or dragon; and those of the horse, snake or sheep. Also, if one with a dog year-sign
marries one with a monkey sign, it is said the couple will have a long prosperous life with many children, as indeed will one with a pig
year-sign who marries one with a mouse or ox sign. However, when one born in a tiger year has a spouse born in a hare or snake year, it is
said the family line will come to an end; and the same applies when one born in a mouse year has a spouse born in a tiger or pig year, when
one born in a monkey year has a spouse born in a bird or sheep year, and when one born in a snake year has a spouse born in a pig, bird or
horse year (Plate 7, fig. 6). It is said that a couple of the hare and pig signs will have many children, as will those whose signs are bird and
snake, ox and sheep, monkey and dragon, or horse and dog (Plate 7, fig. 7). Couples born in the bird and ox years, the tiger and horse
years, the hare and sheep years, the dragon and pig years, or the monkey and snake years are expected to become rich and powerful (Plate
7, fig. 8). Couples born in the mouse’ and horse years, the dog and tiger years, the horse and snake years, the bird and sheep years, the
mouse and ox years, the snake and hare years, or the ox and hare years will have no descendants (Plate 7, fig. 9);s and yet it is said that an
ox and hare couple will have long prosperous lives and good reputation, while a dog and tiger couple will have good fortune.
Couples should avoid marriages that will end in divorce, such as those between those of the bird and tiger, monkey
and hare, dragon and ox, mouse and snake, dog and sheep, or tiger and pig signs (Plate, 7, fig. 10). One of the ox sign who marries one of
the dog or pig sign will have difficulty raising children, as will one of the sheep sign who marries one of the dragon or snake sign (Plate 7,
fig. 11). Certain marriages are said to be inauspicious (Plate 7, fig. 12). For example, when a couple are of the pig and snake signs the
mother-in-law will die prematurely, and the family line will be ended. When a couple are of the dog and dragon signs there will be
unremitting losses, when they are of the mouse and horse signs there will be unhappiness and many sorrows, when they are of the ox and
sheep signs they will experience losses in business, and if a groom of the sheep sign takes a bride of the ox sign they will have a short life
and their children will become orphans. When a couple are of the tiger and monkey signs they will come to a sorry end, disliked by all, and
when they are of the bird and hare signs the mother and her child will be separated. Couples of the bird and dog signs, the horse and ox signs
or the snake and tiger signs are known as the 'six inauspicious misfortunes' ('phung-drug ngan-pa) (Plate 7, fig. 13). Those of the dog and
sheep signs, the ox and hare signs, or the bird and mouse signs are known as the ‘six inauspicious fears' ('jigs-drug ngan-pa) (Plate 7, fig. 14).
There are then three categories of ill-omen pertaining to marriage (Plate 7, fig. 15). The greater category, occur-
ring when a couple are of the sheep and snake year-signs, indicates that they are utterly incapable. The mediocre category, occurring
when a couple are of the horse and dragon or horse and snake year-signs, indicates that their wishes will not be fulfilled, and that the fam-
ily line will end, especially if a groom of the snake year takes a bride of the horse year. The lesser category occurs when a couple are of the
dog, sheep, ox, dragon, mouse or pig years, and it suggests that there will be little advantage and many afflictions.
When couples are of the same year-sign, the portents are diverse (Plate 7, fig. 16). For example, when the groom
and bride are both of the mouse sign they will have many impoverished sons, and when they are both of the ox sign they will have a dis-
abled child, prone to ill-health and short life. When they are both of the tiger sign, they will move home and their house will catch fire.
When they are both of the hare sign, their baby will die, they will be unable to obtain much food or wealth, and they will have many daugh-
ters who are easy to raise, but who will eventually end the family line. When a couple are both of the dragon year-sign, they will be exceed-
ingly quarrelsome, and live from hand to mouth. When they are both of the snake sign, life will be hard in the short term and better in the
long term, but they will risk disputes and divorce. When they are both of the horse year-sign, they will live the life of farmers for long peri-
ods of time and be subjected to many diseases and deaths, having few children. When they are both of the sheep sign, they will be happy in
early life but face great hardships in old age. When they are both of the monkey sign, they will raise the child of another; and when they are



195
Divinations concerning marriage
both of the bird sign, they will have difficulty bringing up their children, and their savings will be exhausted by demons. When they are
both of the dog sign, there will be many disputes, their friendships will be short-lived, and half their children will die prematurely. Lastly,
when they are both of the pig year-sign, they will be disillusioned with the world despite having many children and much wealth. Similar
predictions are made for couples with the same destiny elements. For example, when the groom and bride both have an iron destiny ele-
ment associated with a male year-sign, it will be inauspicious for their sons, and they will incur loss of wealth in middle and later life;
however when they both have an iron destiny element associated with a female year-sign, it will be inauspicious for their daughters.
Plate 7, figs 5-16
སྙ<ཞི་མཐུན་
འདི་རྣམས་རབས་ཚརཔ།
fig. 5
fig. 6
༄༅།འདི་དག་སྟོབས་ན་བུ་མང་འབྱུང་བ།
གནས་
འད་མསསྡེབས་ན་ཕྱུག་བརྩན་འབྱང་བ། ན་
འདི་རྣམས་སྟོབསན་སྐབཀྱང་ཆད།
fig. 7
fig. 8
འདི་རྣམས་སྡེབས་པ་བྱེ་བྲལ་ཡོང་བ།
གང་
པས་བུ་ཚགསོ་ཁ་གའོ།་
འདི་རྣམས་སྡེབས་པ་ན་བ།
ཡང་
fig. 10
fig. 12
POR
འདི་སྔབས་འཐུང་དྲུག་ངན་པ།
འདེ་སྙེབས་འཛཊ་དྲུག
ཞེས་ངན་པ། ལྷས་རིན་ཆེ་ལྟས་ངན་འཁྲི།ལྷས་ངན་ཆུང་།
བུ་
མང་རབུལ། །བྱཚཔོནན། འའཕོ་ཁྱིམ་ ཕྱིའུ་
11
fig. 13
fig. 14
fig. 16
རེཁར་ཆེ།
འཔལ་འཚུབ་ཤུགས་
རིང་ཕུ་ ཚེ་སྦྱོང་སྐྱོར་ཚེ་སྨར མི་བུ་སྲེལ་
བྱིསལ་
གསོ་དཀའ་སྦས་ཕྱིར་
ས་ཕྱིར་ ཐཔའི་མགབྦག་ས་མང་།
འཐབ་རྩོད་མང་འགྲོག་ཡུནསོམས་རཐུན་
Plate 7, fig. 5 (Ms I: ff. 31-32): Marriages between the following combinations of year-sign may form a loving compatible relationship (snying-nye mthun-pa)
mouse; dragon; bird* mouse; ox; tiger
dog; pig; hare
bird; monkey; dragon horse; snake; sheep
Plate 7, fig. 6 (Ms I: ff. 32–33): Marriages between the following combinations of year-sign may bring the family line to an end ('di-rnams rabs chad-pa)
tiger with hare or snake mouse with tiger or pig m onkey with bird or sheep mouse with hare
snake with pig, bird or horse
Plate 7, fig. 7 (Ms I:f. 31): Marriages between the following combinations of year-sign may bring the couple many children ('di-dag sdebs-na bu mang byung-ba)
hare and pig
bird and snake
ox and sheep
monkey and dragon horse and dog
Plate 7, fig. 8 (Ms l: ff. 31-32): Marriages between the following combinations of year-sign may bring riches and power ('di-rnams sdebs-na phyug-btsan 'byung-ba)
bird and ox
tiger and horse
hare and sheep
d ragon and pig
m onkey and snake
Plate 7, fig. 9 (Ms I: ff. 32–33): Marriages between the following combinations of year-sign may result in a couple having no descendants ('di-rnams sdebs-na sgab-kyang chad)
bird and horse
dog and tiger
horse and snake
bird and sheep
mouse and ox
snake and hare
ox and hare
Plate 7, fig. 10 (Ms I: ff. 31-32): Marriages between the following combinations of year-sign may result in divorce ('di-rnams sdebs-pa bye-bral yong-ba)
bird and tiger
monkey and hare
dragon and ox
mouse and snake
dog and sheep
tiger and pig
Plate 7, fig. 11 (Ms I:f.32): Marriages between the following combinations of year-sign suggest the couple will have difficulty raising children ('di-rnams bu-tsha gso-ba dka)
ox with dog or pig
sheep with dragon or snake
Plate 7, fig. 12 (Ms l: ff. 32–33): Marriages between the following combinations of year-sign are inauspicious ('di-rnams sdebs-pa ngan-pa)
pig and snake
dog and dragon
mouse and horse
ox and sheep
tiger and monkey
bird and hare
Plate 7, fig. 13 (Ms I:f. 31): Marriages between the following combinations of year-sign may result in the six so-called inauspicious misfortunes ('phung-drug ngan-pa)
bird and dog
horse and ox
snake and tiger
Plate 7, fig. 14 (Ms I: ff. 31-32): Marriages between the following combinations of year-sign may result in the six so-called inauspicious fears ('di-sdebs 'jigs-drug-zhes ngan-pa)
dog and sheep
ox and hare
bird and mouse
Plate 7, fig. 15 (Ms I: ff. 32–33): Marriages portending ill-omen
mediocre category of ill-omen (Itas-ngan 'bring)
greater category of ill-omen (Itas-ngan che)
sheep and snake
lesser category of ill-omen (Itas-ngan chung)
dog, sheep, ox, dragon, pig or mouse
horse and dragon; horse and snake
short-term
long life as
happiness in early
difficulty raising
many disputations,
disillusionment
Plate 7, fig. 16 (Ms l: ff. 31-33): Marriages between couples of the same year-sign portend the following
many impoverished disabled child
moving home and a baby boy will die
sons (bu-mang dbu) (bu-tsha skyon-can) house catching fire and many daughters
(yul-pho khyim will be born (khye'u
great exasperation
(re-khang che)
raising an
adopted child
harshness and
farmers but
life and hardship
children and
short-lived friendships,
and many children
with few children
in old age
(mi-bu srel
exhaustion of
and half the children
(sems-dbyung bu-
me-'chor)
'chi bu-mo mang
long-term prosperity
('phrel-'tshub
phugs-bzang)
(so-nam snyugs-ring
(tshe-stod skyid
savings by demons
dying prematurely
tsha mang
bu-tsha-nyung)
tshe-smad rgud)
(byis-pa gso-dka'
('thab-rtsod mang 'brog
sris-phyed
yun-thung bu-tsha phyed
'dres-khyer)
gsos phyed)
dog and dog
mouse and mouse
ox and ox
hare and hare
tiger and tiger
dragon and dragon
horse and horse
snake and snake
sheep and sheep
monkey and monkey
bird and bird
pig and pig



196
The White Beryl
Recognising the inauspicious and favourable year-signs for marriage (White Beryl, ff. 230a-231b)
The various categories of inauspicious year, which have already been enumerated in Parts i and iv above, also have an impact upon coin-
cidental marriage. For example, among the four harsh iron and eight fire years, the fire monkey and the fire sheep portend divorce, while
the fire tiger and fire hare suggest the ending of the family line. Similar portents are given for the twelve ‘accursed years' (nag-'thus lo),
the eight ‘inauspicious years' (lo-gnan), the ‘six lesser stars' (skar-chung drug), the ‘seven malign years' (gdug-ba-can-gyi lo bdun), the seven
‘years of bad omen’ (ltas-ngan lo), the seven 'years of drought (than-pa lo bdun), the 'heavenly sentinel (gnam-gyi bya-ra), the ‘earthly sen-
tine(sa'i bya-ra), the twelve iron ‘years promoting drought (than-skyes lo), the four 'black undertakers' (dur-mi nag-po bzhi), the three
‘soaring black sons' (lding-nag bu gsum), the 'black-fanged years' (lo-nag mche-ba-can), the eleven years susceptible to ogres' (srin-khyer lo),
the four ‘naked demons' (ther-'dre mi bzhi), the eight years endowed with the five elements’, the ten years endowed with two elements',
the eight years of widowhood (yugs-sa lo brgyad) and the eight ‘orphan years' (dva-phrug lo). Marriage partners born in such years should
be avoided, otherwise various rites should be undertaken to avert misfortunes. The onus is on those born in inauspicious years, or their
fathers, to find a suitable partner.
Other inauspicious times are associated with triple planetary conjunctions (see Part iv above). Marriage to one
born under a triple Mars conjunction will be inauspicious for persons and property, resulting in the death of the partner, or divorce.
Marriage to one born under a triple Saturn conjunction will result in afflictions due to the spirit lords of the soil, unhappiness in the prime
of life, and children of both good and bad character. Marriage to one born under a triple Mercury conjunction will result in sudden disas-
ters and produce children of variable character. Lastly, marriage to one born under a triple Jupiter conjunction will result in potential
death to paternal relatives.
According to the prediction known as rGya-yi lo-dkar ha-sha (Plate 8, fig. 5), it is impossible for a compati-
ble relationship to be established between couples of the following year-signs: the mouse and the hare, because the mouse will pick up
the hare's child; the ox and the tiger, because they will fight; the dragon and the snake, because they will become entangled; the pig
and the dog, because the dog will carry off the pig's child; the horse and the bird, because the bird will hold onto the horse's saddle;
and the monkey and the sheep, because the sheep's head will butt the monkey's heart. Various predictions are given in the event of
such marriages.
IN
.
Plate 8, fig. 5
Plate 8, fig. 5 (Ms I: ff. 35-36): Prognostications concerning marriage between incompatible couples, according to the rGya-yi lo-dkar ha-sha
The mouse will pick up the hare's child
The ox and the tiger will fight
The dragon and the snake will become entangled
The bird will hold onto the horse's saddle
The dog will carry off the pig's child
The sheep will butt the monkey's heart
Auspicious marriages are also predicted. For example, if the groom is born in the wood bird year and the bride in the fire monkey year the
portents are favourable. The portents are likewise for a groom born in the wood tiger and bride of the fire dog; for a groom of the earth
tiger and a bride of the iron bird; for a groom of the iron dog and a bride of the water monkey; for a groom of the iron horse and a bride of
the water tiger; for a groom of the iron tiger and a bride of the water dog; for a groom of the water mouse and bride of the wood monkey;
for a groom of the water horse and a bride of the wood tiger; or for a groom of the water tiger and a bride of the wood dog.
The deployment of pebbles determining marital compatibility
According to the 'Byung-ba gsal-sgron, thirteen pebbles should be employed to determine marital compatibility. These are enumerated as
follows by Lo-chen Dharmaśrī (Moonbeams, f. 25b):
Then, as for the divination concerning compatible marriage,
Thirteen pebbles should be employed,
Representing the contrast between the couple's] vitality,
body, destiny and luck elements,
The collective tally of these elements ('byung-ba'i spun-grangs),
Their natal months and trigrams,
Their own constitutional types, and those of their mothers,
As well as the four compatible marital conjunctions (gi-gong),
Comprising the numeric squares indicative of their vitality, body, destiny and luck.



197
Divinations concerning marriage
2013
DO
Above Details of Plate 8, fig. 5 (see opposite), showing marriage
between incompatible couples
Chart 5.1, prepared at the Lhasa Man-rtsis-khang, shows the deployment of the basic pebbles that represent the contrast between the
bride's and groom's elemental aspects and their collective tally. It uses the example of a prospective groom of the fire dragon year, aged
twenty-three, and a bride of the earth sheep year, aged twenty.
5.1 Method of calculating divination concerning marriage utilising 13 pebbles
Chart of groom and bride (bu-dang bu-mo“i ming-gi bya-ra)
Groom of fire dragon, aged 23 Pebble of contrast Bride of earth sheep, aged 20
Vitality
earth
earth
Vitality
Body
earth Ox
fire
Body
Destiny fire ºo
earth Destiny
Luck
wood ox
fire
Luck
0
1
Collective tally of the elements
Groom = 9 (odd) Bride = 12 (even)
2
2
4
4
2
2



198
The White Beryl
Individual elemental aspects and particular outcomes based on the destiny element (White Beryl, ff. 231b-233a)
Divinatory pebbles are employed to mark the individual contrasts between the vitality, body, destiny and luck elements of the groom and
bride. These may be placed twice, firstly to indicate the groom's aspects that are to be contrasted with those of the bride; and secondly to
indicate the bride's aspects to be contrasted with those of the groom. Alternatively, the vitality and luck elements of the groom are con-
trasted with those of the bride, while the body and destiny elements of the bride are contrasted with those of the groom. In the words of
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī (Moonbeams, ff. 256–26a):
First, there is one pebble representing the contrast
between the man and woman's vitality elements.
Similarly, there is one pebble for each of the contrasts
between the [man and woman's] body, destiny and luck elements. 6
These pebbles are (employed) twice,
Representing the mutual contrast between the elements of
The man and woman, and between woman and man.
It is also held that for men the vitality and luck elements are precious,
While those of the body and destiny are precious for females.?
If all four elements form mother- or son-relationships, the bride is described as a 'wife connected through past actions' (las-kyi chung-ma),
and if they form friend- or enemy-relationships, they respectively suggest harmony and disharmony. When they form an identity-
relationship, those of fire, iron and wood are considered mediocre, while those of earth and water are best.
As far as the prognostications are concerned, if the vitality elements are in harmony, it suggests a long lifespan
and a close long-term relationship; if the body elements are in harmony, it suggests there will be many healthy offspring; if the destiny
elements are harmonious, it suggests wealth and prosperity; and if the luck elements are harmonious, it suggests good reputation, and
good rapport with both relatives and outsiders, as well as with the high and mighty.
Conversely, when the vitality elements are incompatible, the relationship will be short-lived; when the body ele-
ments are incompatible, the couple will be subject to ill-health; when the destiny elements are incompatible, there will be poverty; and
when the luck elements are incompatible, there will be hostile rumours. Various rites should therefore be performed to counteract those
negative outcomes, particularly when the elements form an enemy-relationship.
In cases where the elements form diverse relationships, the prognoses are varied, depending on whether
these occur between vitality, body, destiny or luck elements. The predictions concerning the diverse relationships between the cou-
ple's destiny elements in particular are depicted on Plate 7, fig. 19. Accordingly, when the couple's destiny elements are wood and fire,
it is predicted that they will be happy, giving birth to three sons and two daughters. When their destiny elements are earth and fire,
they will have approximately three sons and three daughters, and likewise when their destiny elements are earth and iron, or iron
and water. In the last case they will also be prosperous and happy. When their destiny elements are water and wood, it is predicted that
it will be advantageous for the couple to have one son and one daughter and otherwise preferable to have a son than a daughter;
when their destiny elements are both wood, the outcome will resemble a bamboo grove, for there will be one wild son and one
daughter; when they are both fire, there will be three impoverished and deluded sons; when they are both earth, there will be three
sons and three daughters who care for the estates and take charge of the locality; when they are both iron, there will be one wild son
and one daughter, hard to raise and bringing death to servants and cattle; when they are both water, it will be like rivers meeting in
an ocean and there will be one brother and one sister.
When the couple's destiny elements are fire and iron, however, the relationship will be short-lived and there will
be five sons of whom four will die. When their destiny elements are wood and iron, they will have three sons of whom two will die, and
also two daughters. When their destiny elements are earth and water, they will have five sons of whom three will die; when their ele-
ments are earth and wood, they will have six sons of whom four will die; and when their elements are fire and water, they will have three
daughters and one son who will die, and there will be a bitter harvest.
Plate 7, fig. 19 (Mst: ff. 31-32): Prognostications concerning marriage between couples of different or identical destiny elements
When the couple's destiny elements are wood and fire
When the couple's destiny elements are earth and fire
When the couple's destiny elements are earth and iron
When the couple's destiny elements are iron and water
When the couple's destiny elements are water and wood
they will have three healthy sons and two daughters of
they will have three healthy sons and three daughters
they will have three healthy sons and three daughters of
they will have three healthy sons and three daughters of
they will have one healthy son and one daughter of iron destiny.
earth and wood destiny.
of iron, fire and wood destiny.
iron, water and earth destiny.
wood, water and iron destiny.
When the couple's destiny elements are earth and earth
When the couple's destiny elements are fire and fire
When the couple's destiny elements are wood and wood
When the couple's destiny elements are iron and iron
When the couple's destiny elements are water and water
they will have three healthy sons and three daughters of
they will have three healthy sons.
they will have one valiant son and one daughter of iron destiny.
they will have one valiant son and one daughter of iron destiny.
they will have one healthy son and one daughter of iron destiny.
iron, wood and earth destiny.
When the couple's destiny elements are fire and iron
When the couple's destiny elements are wood and iron
When the couple's destiny elements are earth and water
When the couple's destiny elements are earth and wood
When the couple's destiny elements are water and fire
they will have five sons, of whom four will die.
they will have three sons, of whom two will die, and two
they will have five sons, of whom three will die.
they will have six sons, of whom four will die.
they will have one son who will die, and three daughters of water,
earth and wood destiny.
daughters of water and fire destiny.
The above calculations refer to the combination of destiny elements, which is emphasised in the new divination method. In the ancient method, the calculation is made on the basis of the vitality elements
(dbang-thang thug-'phrad 'di rtsis rnying-ma lugs-nas srog gsar-mar dbang-thang gtso-bor 'don-pa-la).



199
Divinations concerning marriage
1)
1 དབཛཐར་ཐུག་འཕྲང་འད་ས་རེད་མ་ལུགས་ ནས་སོག་གསར་མར་དབང་ཐང་གཙོ་བོར་འཛིན་པ་ལ།
Plate 7, fig. 19
Collective tally of the elements (White Beryl, f. 234a)
After examining the contrasts between the vitality, body, destiny and luck elements of the groom and bride, pebbles should be placed
representing these elements, in the following quantities, as depicted on Plate 7, fig. 17: one for a wood element, two for an earth
element, three for a water element, four for a fire element, and five for an iron element. One should then examine whether the
collective tally (spun-grangs) amounts to an even number or an odd number, because that will indicate respectively whether the couple
will be compatible or not. If the divination shows that they are compatible, the couple will be like-minded and caring for one another,
with few quarrels and misfortunes. If the tally is incompatible, however, they will quarrel for no reason and eventually hate one
another. Consequently, certain rites should be performed, the Tales of the Past Lives of the Buddha should be recited and the groom
should wear an amulet dedicated to Mañjughosa.
Plate 7, fig. 17 (Ms 1, f.34): Calculating the collective tally of the elements
Element ('byung-ba)
wood
Number [of pebbles cast] (bgrang)
one
earth
water
fire
iron
འགྱུར་བ།
two
three
four
five
Oolon
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises the placement of these collective pebbles as follows (Moonbeams, f. 26a):
བགྲར།
Derived therefrom there is the divination
Plate 7, fig. 17
Of the collective tally of the elements.
One pebble represents wood, two represent earth,
Three water, four fire, and five iron.
Thus, the pebbles [marking the aforementioned contrasts]
Should be counted into odd- or even-numbered piles,
And one should then examine whether they are equal,
Or one is higher than the other (mnyam-rgya)."O



200
The White Beryl
Prognostications concerning the natal months (White Beryl, f. 235a)
If the couple’s natal months (skyes-zla), or days and hours, lack inauspicious factors – including enemy-relationships or inauspicious
tomb-signs and seventh-removed year aspects (bdun-zur), and the like – they will be compatible, and the prognosis will be auspicious,
indicating that they will have great merit and long-lasting friendship. If they are incompatible, however, the outcome will be inauspi-
cious, and they will not have many children. Charms should then be made to avert divorce, and the Ratnakūța Sūtras should be recited.
Predictions are also given for compatible and incompatible planetary conjunctions at birth. Chart 5.2 indicates a compatible reading.
5.2 Calculating the compatibility of natal months
Natal month of groom and bride
1. Groom's natal month: 6th month / bird (iron)
2. Bride's natal month: 5th month / monkey (iron)
X
Prognostications concerning the natal trigrams (White Beryl, f. 235a-236b)
First, the natal trigrams (skyes-spar) of the groom and bride should be calculated individually, as in chart 5.3.
5.3 Calculating the compatibility of natal trigrams
Natal trigrams of groom and bride
1. Groom's natal trigram: Gin (earth)
2. Bride's natal trigram: Zin (wood)
XX
It is said that if the individual trigrams of the groom or bride coincide with one of the four auspicious trigrams, they will always be
blessed with children and grandchildren. Specifically, as depicted on Supplementary Plate 17, fig. 4, if the individual trigrams of the
groom and bride correspond to the chart of heavenly medicine' (gnam-sman), the best relationships will be formed by those born under Li
and Kham, Khon and Khen, Dva and Gin or Zin and Zon. In these cases, the prognosis is one of good luck and prosperity. Similar predic-
tions are made on a sliding scale from good to bad for the seven other charts, 'growth through glory' (dpal-bskyed) and so forth. Thus, if
the individual trigrams of the bride and groom correspond to the chart of growth through glory', the best relationships will be formed by
those born under Li and Zon, Khon and Dva, Khen and Gin or Kham and Zin, in which cases it is said that the glory of the gods will
descend upon mankind, the couple will be beloved by gods and humans and be endowed with sons and wealth. If the individual trigrams
of the bride and groom correspond to the chart known as 'sustaining vitality' (srog-'tsho), the best relationships will be formed by those
born under Li and Zin, Khon and Gin, Dva and Khen or Kham and Zin, in which cases the couple will be endowed with long life, merits
and good auspices. The chart of ‘intimation of luck' (phyva-lon) is considered neutral for potential spouses.
SER
agraaragaragiaan
cacat
astragjent
འཀྱི་ཕྱིབས་
dafragt
ཙག་འཕཉེབས་
DEN BOONONOOD
Plate 17, fig. 4
Plate 17, fig. 4 (Ms II, ff. 6-10): Prognostications concerning compatibility under the auspicious natal trigrams (White Beryl, f. 235a/b)
The four auspicious unions of the heavenly medicine' chart (bzang-bzhi gnam-sman sdebs) are between
The four auspicious unions of the 'growth through glory' chart (bzang-bzhi dpal-bskyed sdebs) are between
The four auspicious unions of the 'sustaining vitality' chart (bzang-bzhi srog-'tsho sdebs) are between
Li/Kham
Li/Zon
Li/Zin
Khon/Khen
Khon/Dva
Dva/Gin
Khen/Gin
Dva/Khen
Zin/Zon
Kham/Zin
Kham/Zin
| Khon/Gin
Conversely, if the individual natal trigrams of the bride and groom correspond to one of the inauspicious trigrams, it will be bad for the
children of such a marriage. Specifically, as depicted on Supplementary Plate 17, fig. 5, if their trigrams correspond to the chart of the
'cutting influence of demons' (bdud-gcod), the worst relationships will be formed by those born under Li and Khen, Dva and Zin, Khon
and Kham or Gin and Zon. If they correspond to the chart of ‘corporal punishment (lus chad-pa), the worst relationships will be formed
by those born under Li and Khon, Dva and Zon, Gin and Zon or Khen and Kham. If they correspond to the chart of the five demons' ('dre-
inga), the worst relationships will be formed by those born under Li and Dva, Khon and Zon, Gin and Kham or Khen and Zin. Lastly, if
they correspond to the chart of 'harm' (gnod-pa), the worst relationships will be formed by those born under Li and Gin, Khen and Zon,
Dva and Kham or Khon and Zin.
gracijavina
<gracar
ཏུས་ག་ཞབས་
Otac
agregant
JOODIJOOOOOOOOOOO
programa paraan
Plate 17, fig. 5
Plate 17, fig. 5 (Ms II, ff. 6-10): Prognostications concerning incompatibility under the inauspicious natal trigrams (White Beryl, f. 235b-236a)
Li/Khen
QO001DEDC
DOOO 000
Li/Khon
The four inauspicious unions of the 'cutting influence of demons' chart (ngan-bzhi bdud-gcod sdebs) are between
The four inauspicious unions of the 'corporal punishment' chart (ngan-bzhi lus-chad sdebs) are between
The four inauspicious unions of the 'five demons' chart (ngan-bzhi 'dre-Inga sdebs) are between
The four inauspicious unions of the 'harm' chart (ngan-bzhi gnod-pa sdebs) are between
Dva/Zin
Dva/Zon
Khon/Zon
Khen/Zon
Khon/Kham
Gin/Zon
Gin/Kham
Dva/Kham
Gin/Zon
Khen/Kham
Khen/Zin
Khon/Zin
Li/Dva
Li/Gin



201
Divinations concerning marriage
In the case of such negative predictions, various remedial rites and methods should be applied. For example, if the combined trigrams of
the groom and bride are associated with the chart known as the 'cutting influence of demons', which portends the mediocre class of worst
relationships, the predictions are ominous, as depicted on Plate 7, fig. 20. If the groom and bride have the natal trigrams Li and Khen, it is
predicted that they will keep an empty house and will eventually become destitute, even if presently rich, and they will endure many
sufferings. Consequently, the rite of aversion called bdud-kyi khram-kha stong bzlog-pa, and so forth, should be performed. If the groom
and bride have the combined natal trigrams Dva and Zin, it is predicted that one of the spouses will die of a stab wound. The Litany of the
Names of Mañjuśrī('Jam-dpal mtshan-brjod) and other texts should be recited to avert this outcome. If the groom and bride have the com-
bined natal trigrams Khon and Kham, it is predicted that their house will collapse and they will constantly endure losses. To counteract
this outcome, the thread-cross called zhal-bsgyur khram-bzlog spyi-mdos should be made, among others. If their combined natal trigrams
are Gin and Zon, it is predicted that the spirit lord gNam-khyi nag-po will ensure that even if they have a hundred children, their family
line will eventually come to an end. Consequently they should recite the Avatamsakasūtra, and make the thread-cross called gnam-khyi
nag-po'i mdos as a remedy. Lastly, as an example of the worst category of chart based on the trigrams, that of corporal punishment, if the
groom and bride have the combined natal trigrams Dva and Zon,''it is predicted that they will wield a butcher's knife, and that the bride
will eventually ride off on a donkey, leading a dog by the leash. Consequently, the remedial thread-cross called sa-bdag gtor-mdos should
be made, and the rite of longevity (tshe-chog) should be performed, and so forth.
གཟའ་མའི་སྐྱེས
སྤར།
བསང་མ་ངན་
པའི་འབྲས་བྱ།
Plate 7, fig. 20
Plate 7, fig. 20 (Ms I, ff. 33–34): Prognostications concerning marriage between couples of diverse natal trigrams in the chart known as the 'cutting influence of demons' (White Beryl, f. 235a-236a)
If the natal trigrams of the Li and Khen
Dva and Zin
Khon and Kham
Gin and Zon
Dva and Zon 12
couple are (gza'-ma'i skyes-spar)
the inauspicious result provoked they will keep an empty house one of the spouses will their house will collapse and the spirit lord gNam-khyi nag-po they will wield a butcher's knife,
by the protector deities
and will eventually become die of a stab wound.
they will constantly endure will ensure that even if they and the bride will ride off on a
will be as follows (bsrung-ma destitute, even if presently rich;
losses.
have a hundred children, their donkey, leading a dog by the leash.
ngan-pa'i 'bras-bu)
and they will endure many sufferings.
family line will end.
Inauspicious marriages also occur when either the groom or the bride has a natal trigram in one of the four cardinal directions, and the
other has one of the four tomb-signs. Accordingly, as depicted on Supplementary Plate 17, fig. 6, the family line may come to an end when
the groom has the natal trigram Zin and the bride's year-sign is one of the five sheep years, or alternatively when the bride has the natal
trigram Dva and the groom one of the five ox years, the groom has the natal trigram Li and the bride one of the five dog years, or the
bride has the natal trigram Kham and the groom one of the five dragon years.
Plate 17, fig. 6
caroseala miya cerigoured
abastaदेवर
lyuk at
as
Plate 17, fig. 6 (Ms II: ff. 7–8) Inauspicious marriages occurring when one spouse has a trigram in a cardinal direction and the other has a tomb-sign (White Beryl, f. 236b)
The following inauspicious marriages occur when either the man or the woman has a trigram occupying one of the four cardinal
directions, and the other has one of the four tomb-signs [thereby bringing an end to the family line] (pho-mo gcig spar-kha
phyogs-bzhi gcig dur-bzhi sdebs-ngan)
This occurs when the man's
and the woman's
Or when the woman's
and the man's year-
Or when the man's
and the woman's year-
Or when the woman's
and the man's year-sign
trigram (pho'i-span) is
year-sign (mo'i-lo) is
trigram (mo'i span is
sign (pho'i-lo)is
trigram (pho'i span) is
sign (mo'i-lo) is
trigram (mo'i spar) is
(pho'i lo) is
Zin
one of the five
Dva
one of the five
one of the five
Kham
one of the five
sheep years.
ox years.
dog years.
dragon years.



202
The White Beryl
When the bride and groom have an identical natal trigram, various ill portents are predicted, as depicted on Plate 7, fig. 18, and
Supplementary Plate 17, fig. 7. For example, if their natal trigram is Li, the bride will be downcast; if their trigram is Khon, she will rake
the earth; if their trigram is Dva, she will be stabbed; if their trigram is Khen, she will vanish as if into space; if their trigram is Kham, even
a bride of royal birth will have shoes with holes; if their trigram is Gin, the bride will carry the husband on her back into the mountains; if
their trigram is Zin, she will slip out of the house; and if their trigram is Zon, she will wear black trousers on her head’, i.e. she will be pol-
luted or contaminated. To remedy these negative outcomes, which are likened to the theft of the couples' destiny, various rites should be
performed and charms (gto) should be made.
Plate 7, fig. 18
སར་ནང་
སྟེ་བས།
བབད་མི་༤ བགར་ས་ བགསེར་གྱི་མཁར་
འབྲས་བུ།
{བུས་པ། | སྦུབ་པ། ར་བཏབ་པར་བྱའི་ལ
RISULTATI
NANT
འསབ།
བག་ཡརྒྱལ།བག་མས། | བག་མ་ཁང བག་མའི་
རྡལ་ས་ རྒྱབ་ལ་ཁོ་པར་འཛུལ་པ མགར་དོན་
བཟུང་བ། ཕྱུར་ཁ། །
ཞིག་གྱོན་པ།
Dva
Khen
Kham
Gin
Zin
Zon
Plate 7, fig. 18 (Ms 1: f.34): Prognostications concerning marriage between couples with an identical trigram
Couples with the identical Li
Khon
trigram (spar-kha nang-sdebs)
may have the following the bride will be downcast the bride will rake the earth
the bride will be stabbed
the bride will vanish, as if into
a bride of royal birth will have
the bride will carry the husband on
the bride will slip out of the house
the bride will 'wear black trousers on
result ('bras-bu
(bag-ma kha bub-pa).
(bag-ma sa-srub-pa).
(bag mar gri-phur btab-pa).
space (nam-mkhar
shoes with holes (bag-ma rgyal-pa her back (bag-mas rgyab-la
(bag-ma khang-par 'dzul-pa).
her head (bag-ma'i mgor
yar-ba'i tshu).
rdol-ba bzung-ba).
khyo-khur-ba).
dor-nag gyon-pa).
Plate 17, fig. 7
སྤ༨ཁགཞུ་སྡེབས་ངཤ་ས་
དབང་ཀྱང་ཡིས་ཁྱོར་
WS
wigion
redraticar
Bu,
वववत्वना
Kul armor
Gaireni
Plate 17, fig. 7 (Ms II: ff. 9–10): Inauspicious marriages between spouses sharing the same natal trigram (White Beryl, f. 236b)
The following inauspicious marriages between spouses sharing the same natal trigram have their destiny carried off by thieves (spar-kha nang-sdebs! ngan-pa dbang-thang chom-khyer)
Li
Khon
Dva
Khen
Kham
Gin
Zin
Zon
When the bride and groom share
When the bride and groom share
When the bride and groom share
When the bride and groom share
When the bride and groom share
the trigram Dva, the bride will be
When the bride and groom share
the trigram Khen, the bride will
When the bride and groom share
the trigram Kham, the bride will
the trigram Gin, the bride will
the trigram Zin, the bride will slip
the trigram Li, the bride will be
downcast (li-nang kha-bub). 14
the trigram Khon, the bride will
rake the earth
(khon-nang sa-bsubs). 15
When the bride and groom share
the trigram Zon, the bride will be
polluted or contaminated
(zon-nang grib-mkhon).
stabbed (dva-nang gri-phur).
vanish, as if into space
have shoes with holes
carry her husband into the
out of the house
(khen-nang nam-ya).
(kham-nang zhabs-rdo).
mountains (gin-nang ri-bskya).
(zin-nang tshang-shor).
Furthermore, the so-called theoretical or ‘unchanging aspect of divination science' (gtsug mi-'gyur-ba) portends, as depicted on
Supplementary Plate 17, fig. 8, that marriages between couples with a wood hare sign and the trigram Zin will be inauspicious, as will
those between couples with a fire horse sign and the Li trigram, the iron bird sign and the Dva trigram, or the water mouse sign and the
Kham trigram. In these cases, the spar-sel dgra-lha'i gral-mdos thread-cross should be made. Similarly, the so-called practical or ‘hand-
gesture aspect of divination science' (lag-gYab) portends that marriages between couples with an ox or tiger sign and the Gin trigram
will be inauspicious, as will those between couples with a dragon or snake sign and the Zon trigram, a monkey or sheep sign and the Khon
trigram, or the mouse or pig sign and the Khen trigram (Plate 17, fig. 9). In such cases, remedial action should be taken by means of
specified ritual charms (gto).
Plate 17, fig. 8
གཙུག་ལགཡི་འགྱུར་བ་བཞི་ངན་
Plate 17, fig. 8 (Ms II: f. 6): Inauspicious marriages according to the theoretical or 'unchanging aspect of divination science' (White Beryl, f. 236b)
The following are the four 'inauspicious marriages according to the unchanging aspect of divination science' (gtsug mi-'gyur-ba bzhi-ngan)
those between couples with a wood
those between couples with a fire
those between couples with an iron
hare year-sign and the trigram Zin
horse year-sign and the trigram Li
bird year-sign and the trigram Dva
those between couples with a water
mouse year-sign and the trigram Kham



203
Divinations concerning marriage
તપનાખવા
སྤྱདལྡེབས་ངན་ས་
Plate 17, fig. 9
Plate 17, fig. 9 (Ms II: ff. 7–8): Inauspicious marriages according to the practical or 'hand-gesture aspect of divination science' (White Beryl, f. 236b)
The following are the eight 'inauspicious marriages according to the hand-gesture aspect of divination science' (lag-gYab brgyad-sdebs ngan-pa)
those between couples of the ox or
those between couples of the dragon or
those between couples of the monkey
those between couples of the mouse or
tiger year-signs and the Gin trigram 16
snake year-sign and the Zon trigram
or sheep year-sign and the Khon trigram
pig year-sign and the Khen trigram
The finding of a spouse or partner with a certain conjunction of year-sign and trigram may also be inauspicious, as depicted on
Supplementary Plate 17, fig. 10. For example, when the bride has the year-sign wood tiger or hare and the trigram Khon, the groom will
be afflicted by spirit lords of the soil, and specified rites to rectify infringements of the spirit lords of the soil should be undertaken. When
the groom has the year-sign iron monkey or bird and the trigram Gin, the spirit lords of the soil will afflict the wife, requiring the recita-
tion of the sNang-brgyad. When the bride has the year-sign fire horse or snake and the trigram Khen, in-laws will be swept aside. When a
bride has the year-sign earth ox, sheep, dog or dragon and the trigram Zon it will be inauspicious for wealth. When the bride has the tri-
gram Khen and the groom Zon, it will be inauspicious for outsiders and for property. When a bride has the year-sign water mouse or pig
and the trigram Khon or Gin, the groom may suffer; and when she has the trigram Khon the merit of the groom will be diminished. In all
such negative cases remedial ritual actions must be taken.
gfinowa
gadus.
avaus
STAT
Care
KLO
0001
DUJOO
Plate 17, fig. 10
Plate 17, fig. 10 (Ms II, ff. 9–10): Inauspicious marriages formed by the conjunction of certain year-signs and trigrams (White Beryl, f. 236b)
Inauspicious marriages formed by the conjunction of certain year-signs and trigrams (lo-spar sprad-pa'i ngan-sdebs)
when the woman has the following year-sign
when the husband has the following year-sign when the woman has the following year-sign
when the woman has the following year-sign
when the woman and man respectively have
when the woman has the following year-sign
when the woman has the following trigram
and trigram (bu-med-kyi lo-span):
and trigram (mo'i lo-spar):
the following trigrams (pho-mo'i spar-kha):
and trigram (mo'i lo-spar):
(mo-spar):
and trigram (bu-med-kyi lo-spar):
wood tiger or hare and Khon
and trigram (khyo'i lo-spar):
iron monkey or bird, and Gin
fire horse or snake, and Khen
earth ox, sheep, dog or dragon and Zon
Khen and Zon
water mouse or pig and Khon or Gin
Khon
According to another tradition, marriages between couples born under male trigrams will result in more sons, whereas those between
couples born under female trigrams will result in more daughters. For example (Supplementary Plate 17, fig. 11), when a couple have the
natal trigrams Li and Khon, it is predicted that they may have five sons, while those with the natal trigrams Khon and Dva may have
eight or nine, and those with Dva and Gin may have three or five children, while those with Gin and Kham may have two or three chil-
dren, or else five sons. Couples with the natal trigrams Gin and Zin may have one son and one daughter, while those with the trigrams
Zon and Zin may have two sons, those with Kham and Zin or Zon three sons,17 those with Dva and Kham three or five sons, those with Li
and Khen two sons, those with Li and Zon more daughters, and those with Kham and Zin one son and two daughters.
बनावतलावात्रवाना
regin
arejista
ད(གི ཞི་གསུམ། གླུ་མ་གཅི།
saat ini dichiadica
Agimai
ཏུ་ཁའབ་སུ་ད་་ ཁ་བ་ཁེན་བྱ་གཞི་
ની વ્યવળ(બt અassળતા.
Strut1
Kla19
6 9
OOO
ONDOOOL
CoDDDDDD090
Plate 17, fig. 11
Couples with the natal
Couples with the natal
Couples with the natal
Couples with the natal
Couples with the natal
Couples with the natal
Couples
trigrams Zon and Zin may
trigrams Kham and Zin
trigrams Dva and Kham
trigrams Li and Khen
trigrams Li and Zon may
trigrams Kham and Zin
Plate 17, fig. 11 (Ms II: ff. 6–10): Prognostications concerning the number of children based on the couple's natal trigrams (White Beryl, ff. 236b-237a)
Couples with the natal Couples with the natal Couples with the natal Couples with the natal Couples with the natal
trigrams Li and Khon may trigrams Khon and Dva may trigrams Dva and Gin may trigrams Gin and Kham may trigrams Gin and Zin
have five children
have eight or nine children have three or five children have two or three children, may have one son
(li-khon Inga-skye). (khon-dva brgyad-dgu). (dva-gin gsum mam Inga). or else five sons (gin-kham and one daughter
gsum-mam gnyis (gin-zin pho-mo gnyis).
have two sons
may have three or
may have two sons
have more daughters
may have one son and two
or Zon may have three
sons (kham-zin-zon
(zon-zin bu-gnyis).
five sons (dva-kham
(li-khen bu gnyis).
(li-zon bu-mo mang).
daughters (kham-zin
bu gsum)
gsum-dang Inga).
bu-gcig bu-mo gnyis).
yang-na bu-Inga). 18
Gin/Zin
Zon/Zin
Kham/Zin/Zon
Dva/Kham
Gin/Kham
Li/Khen
Li/Zon
Dva/Gin
Li/Khon
Khon/Dva
Kham/Zin



204
The White Beryl
Prognostications of marital compatibility based on constitutional types (White Beryl, f. 234a/b)
In Moonbeams, Lo-chen Dharmaśrī indicates that a divination should be undertaken to contrast the constitutional types of the bride and
groom, whereas in White Beryl, the calculation is based on the constitutional types of the groom's father and the bride's father. It is impor-
tant to note that in this context the constitutional type is obtained by calculating the element corresponding to the natal numeric square,
as in exemplary chart 5.4.
5.4 Calculating the compatibility of constitutional types
Constitutional type of groom and bride
1. Groom's constitutional type:
White 6 (iron)
ОХ
2. Bride's constitutional type:
Blue 3 (water)
00
If these are compatible, it is said that the couple will never harm one another and will remain friends for a long period of time. If they are
incompatible, the one who harms the other first will die beforehand. However, for the protection of the husband especially, a stūpa should
be constructed and dedicated to Mahābala. It will be best if the groom's tally is higher when the vitality elements of the two fathers are
contrasted. Otherwise the outcome will be inauspicious and the Mahāmāyārī Dhāraṇī should be recited, along with specific burnt
offerings (homa). 19 Then, starting from the year-signs of the two fathers, one should count through the twelve sectors of growth and
decline, until one arrives at their children's year-signs or natal trigrams. It will be auspicious if both divinations coincide with one of the
six auspicious sectors, and inauspicious if they do not - resulting in eventual ending of the family line. To counteract an inauspicious div-
ination, one should recite the Sūtra of the Greater Vehicle entitled Subjugation of the Great Chiliocosm (Mahāsahasrapramardana-nāma-
mahāyānasūtra), and make a thread-cross dedicated to Brahmā in the form Lha-yi srung. 20
Similarly, if the constitutional types of the groom's mother and the bride's mother are compatible, the children
will be of excellent physical appearance and of great strength and intelligence; otherwise they will be of small stature and poor complex-
ion, for which reason they should recite the Retentive Mantra entitled Reliance on Many Sons (Āryabahuputrapratisaraņa-nāma-dhāraṇī) and
wear a special protective amulet. Chart 5.5 is exemplary.
5.5 Calculating the compatibility of maternal constitutional types
Constitutional type of the mothers of the groom and bride
1. Constitutional type of groom's mother:
White 1 (iron)
2. Constitutional type of bride's mother:
White 6 (iron)
x
According to some, if the mother of the bride has a destiny element of a higher count than that of the groom's mother, it is auspicious,
indicating that she will find an excellent groom, whereas if the reverse is true, the groom will be poor. By counting through the twelve
sectors of growth and decline, one should calculate the auspicious conjunctions, suggesting that there will be many children, and the
inauspicious ones, indicating that the children will be unhelpful.
Among the various constitutional types, which are depicted on Supplementary Plate 17, figs 2–3, it is said that
the auspicious conjunctions are those of wood (keg) and fire (ji), fire (ji) and earth (kungs), earth (kungs) and iron (shang), iron (shang) and
water ('u), water ('u) and wood (keg), wood (keg) and water ('u), water ('u) and iron (shang), iron (shang) and earth (kungs), earth (kungs) and
fire (ji), or between fire (ji) and wood (keg). Inauspicious conjunctions are formed by wood (keg) and iron (shang) or earth (kungs), earth
(kungs) and wood (keg) or water ('u), fire (ji) and iron (shang) or water ('u), iron (shang) and fire (ji) or wood (keg), or between water ('u) and
earth (kungs) or fire (ji). These are said to have an inauspicious outcome.
on
Tourant
Plate 17, fig. 2
Plate 17, fig.2 (Ms II: ff. 6–8): Auspicious marriages between spouses of specific constitutional types (White Beryl, ff. 2345–235a)
Auspicious marital unions are formed between spouses of the following constitutional types (rus-khams bzang-sdebs)
keg (wood) and ji (fire) and kungs (earth) and shang (iron) and 'u(water) and keg (wood) and 'u (water) and
ji (fire)
kungs (earth) shang (iron) 'U(water) keg (wood) " (water) shang (iron)
shang (iron) and
kungs (earth)
kungs (earth) and
ji (fire)
ji (fire) and
keg (wood)



205
Divinations concerning marriage
şhioarulla
TAA
UU
Plate 17, fig. 3
Plate 17, fig. 3 (Ms II: ff. 9–10): Inauspicious marriages between spouses of specific constitutional types (White Beryl, f. 235a)
Inauspicious marital unions are formed between spouses of the following constitutional types (rus-khams ngan-sdebs, White Beryl, f. 235a)
shang (iron) and ji (fire),
keg (wood) and shang (iron),
or kungs (earth)
kungs (earth) and keg (wood),
or 'u(water)
ji (fire) and shang (iron),
or 'u (water)
'u (water) and kungs
(earth), or ji (fire)
or keg (wood)
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises the placement of the pebbles in relation to these last three topics in the following verses (Moonbeams,
f. 26a/b):
In the same way, pebbles should be employed
Representing the contrast between and analysis of
The two vitality elements of [the couple's) natal months,
As well as between the two elements of their natal trigrams,
Their two constitutional types, and those of their mothers. 21
There are many techniques for calculating these aspects,
But according to the authoritative Twenty Verse Auto-commentary on the Root Tantra, 22
'Marital union should be determined
Through the mother-, son-, enemy- and friend-relationships 23
Formed by the elements,'
The nine charts of the permutated calculation of marital compatibility (White Beryl, ff. 233-234a)
At this juncture Moonbeams includes three distinct calculations which Sangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho, in White Beryl, prefers to place after the
Collective Tally of the Elements. Among them, the first is known as the “permutated calculation of marital compatibility' (gi-gong khug-
pa). It comprises nine charts, which are named after the different types of relationship formed by the eight trigrams.24 The most auspi-
cious is the chart of 'heavenly medicine' (gnam-sman), symbolised by a circular mirror, followed in declining sequence by those of ‘sustain-
ing vitality' (srog-'tsho), 'growth through glory' (dpal-bskyed), ‘intimation of luck' (phyva-lon), ‘average luck' (phyva-gYang), ‘harm’
(gnod-pa), ‘five demons' ('dre-lnga), ‘cutting influence of demons' (bdud-gcod) and corporal punishment (lus chad-pa).
These charts are all represented on the paintings – 1-4 on Plate 6 (fig. 16), and 5–9 on Plate 7 (fig. 24) – where
they are symbolised respectively by the mirror, the vajra, the heart-orb (śrīvatsa), the svāstika, a second svāstika, the red triangle, the five
points, the dagger (kīla) and a penis.
Each chart contains the nine numeric squares, which are superimposed on, or placed back to back with, the corre-
sponding trigrams: Li is juxtaposed with Red Nine, Kham with White One, Khon with Black Two, Khen with White Six, Dva with Red
Seven, Gin with White Eight, Zin with Blue Three, and Zon with Green Four. Yellow Five is fixed immutably at the centre on the
abdomen of the divination turtle.
Practically speaking, it is important to identify the four numeric squares of vitality, body, destiny and luck in
respect of both the groom and the bride, and on that basis determine their corresponding trigram relationship. The numeric square and
trigram of the groom are inscribed in the upper sector of the chart, while those of the bride are inscribed in the lower sector. The type of tri-
gram relationship is inscribed to the left and the corresponding pebble count to the right. In general, it is said that the numeric square of
the vitality element is obtained by counting four places backwards, that of the destiny element by counting four places forwards, while that
of the body element is identified with the natal numeric square, and that of the luck element with one or other of the categories of three
compatible signs. The four numeric squares representing these four elemental aspects exclude the possibility of Yellow Five, which is
fixed at the centre. Therefore if any one of the four would normally be Yellow Five, then Black Two should be substituted for it in the case
of the groom, and Red Seven in the case of the bride.25 The following model chart (5.6) shows how the four pebbles of vitality, body, destiny
and luck are calculated. The subjects are the same as above, the groom being of the fire dragon year and the bride of the earth sheep year.
5.6 The permutated calculation of marital compatibility
1. Vitality numeric square (srog-sme)
2. Body numeric square (lus-sme)
3. Destiny numeric square (dbang-sme)
4. Luck numeric square (klung-sme)
groom: Blue 3 = Zin
groom: White 6 = Khen
groom: Red 9 = Li
groom: Black 2 = Khon
-
'sustaining vitality' (srog-'tsho)
00
'five demons' ('dre-Inga)
ОХ
'cutting influence of demons' (bdud-gcod)
'corporal punishment' (lus-chad)
XX
bride: Red 9 = Li
bride: Blue 3 = Zin
bride: White 6 = Khen
bride: Red 9 = Li



206
The White Beryl
Four pebbles are employed to determine these gi-gong charts,
the procedure being summarised by Lo-chen Dharmaśrī as
follows (Moonbeams, f. 26b):
Then, as for the four calculations of compatible marriage (gi-gong):
The four numeric squares of the vitality, body, destiny and luck elements
should be identified (for both the bride and groom),
And then the numeric squares should be placed back to back
with the corresponding) trigrams.
Four pebbles should be employed in order to calculate
Whether the permutated marriage calculation
Consequently, the layout of trigrams and numeric squares in the mirror chart of heavenly medicine' suggests that there will be happi-
ness, long-term good auspices and a long close relationship - giving birth to many children – unafflicted by demonic possession. Then
the layout of trigrams and numeric squares in the vajra chart of sustaining vitality', which is slightly less auspicious, suggests that there
will be long life with relatively few diseases, and an advanced age will be reached, free from the influence of demonic possession.
Ornaments should be attached to a divine image. The layout of trigrams and numeric squares in the heart-orb chart of 'growth through
glory' suggests that the couple will have illustrious and loving children. Their cattle and wealth will flourish, they will have few ailments,
and they will be endowed with identical aspirations, fortune and wealth. The layout of trigrams and numeric squares in the first svāstika
chart, of ‘intimation of luck”, suggests that there will be long life and prosperity, the deities will not be well disposed and the couple will
have an average number of children, fulfilling their aspirations. The layout of trigrams and numeric squares in the second svāstika chart,
of “average luck’, suggests that wealth will come through the birth of children and all will be well if prayers are said on behalf of the lake-
dwelling mermaids (sman-mo) and countryside deities (yul-lha) and spirits. The layout of trigrams and numeric squares in the triangle
chart of harm'suggests that there will be great loss of wealth, and finally the couple will become beggars, alienated from each other with
few children, friendless, and with heavy burdens. The layout of trigrams and numeric squares in the five points chart of five demons' sug-
gests that demons and spirits will ingress over the long term, the family line will be interrupted, wealth will be dissipated, many deaths
will occur, and the couple will constantly be subjected to quarrels and accusations. To avert this outcome, various prescribed rituals
should be performed. The layout of trigrams and numeric squares in the dagger chart of the 'cutting influence of demons' suggests that
the husband will become debilitated by ill-health and will lack property, while his wife will be constantly in sorrow. There will be bank-
ruptcy and the father's land will be usurped, in consequence of which various prescribed rites should be performed as early as possible.
Lastly, the layout of trigrams and numeric squares in the worst chart of corporal punishment suggests that the couple's potency will
gradually diminish and fade away, and they will be harmed by enemies or subjected to quarrels and accusations. There will be various
diseases and an inability to achieve anything at all. In such negative cases the prescribed remedial methods should be applied at all times.
Corresponds to the chart called]
'sustaining vitality' or to some other.
Since the groom's [four numeric squares) must exclude [Yellow] Five,
[Black] Two should be counted (instead],
And since the bride's [four numeric squares] must exclude [Yellow] Five,
[Red] Seven should be counted (instead].
Plate 6, fig. 16 (Ms I: ff. 29–30): Charts of the nine permutated calculations (1-4)
2. Chart of sustaining the vitality' (srog-'tsho), symbolised by a vajra
1. Chart of 'heavenly medicine' (gnam-sman), symbolised by a circular mirror
SSE White 6
SSW Black 2
SSE Blue 3
SSW Red 9
ESE Green 4
Circular mirror (Yellow 5)
WSW White 8
ESE Black 2
Vajra (Yellow 5)
WSW Red 7
ENE Blue 3
WNW Red 7
ENE White 8
WNW White 6
NNE White 1
NNW Red 9
NNE Green 4
NNW White 1
The layout of numeric squares in this mirror chart of 'heavenly medicine', which is the best of all,
suggests that there will be happiness, long-term good auspices, and a long close relationship, unafflicted
by demonic possession (gnam-sman 'go-ba rab-kyi rab sems-bde phugs-bzang 'grogs yun-ring|
gdon-gyi mi-tshugs)
The layout of numeric squares in the vajra chart of sustaining vitality' suggests that there will be long life
with relatively few diseases, and an advanced age will be reached, free from the influence of demonic
possession. Nonetheless, ornaments should be attached to a divine image (babs-na tshe-ring na-tsha
dkon gdon-rnams bral-zhing mi-grangs-darl Iha-la btags-shing rgyan-cha bya)
གཞན་སྙན་འགེ་ལ་རྡབ་ཀྱི་རས་ བབས་ན་ཚེརིང་ན་ཚོར།8
སེམས་བདེ་ཕུགས་བཟད་ གདོན་རྣམས་བྲལ་ཞིང་མ་
འགྲོགས་ཡུན་རིང་གདོན ཀྲུངས་དར།ལྷ་ལ་བཏགས་
གྱི་མ་རྒྱུགས། ། ཤིང་རྒྱན་ཚབྱེད།
Plate 6, fig. 161. 'Heavenly medicine', 2. 'Sustaining the vitality'.
3. Chart of 'growth through glory' (dpal-bskyed), symbolised by a śrīvatsa
4. Chart of 'intimation of luck' (phyva-lon), symbolised by a svāstika
SSE Red 9
SSE Black 2
SSW Red 7
SSW Red 9
ESE Red 9
Śrīvatsa (Yellow 5)
WSW White 8
ESE White 6
Svāstika (Yellow 5)
WSW White 8
ENE Green 4
WNW White 6
ENE White 6
WNW White 8
1
NNE White 1
NNW Blue 3
NNE Red 7
NNW Red 7
The layout of numeric squares in the heart-orb chart of 'growth through glory' suggests that the couple
The layout of numeric squares in the svāstika chart of 'intimation of luck' suggests that there will be
will have illustrious children of good repute. Their cattle and wealth will flourish, they will have few
long life and prosperity, the deities and mankind will be well disposed, and the couple will have seven
ailments, and five of their siblings will have opulent and powerful tombs (dpal-skyed dpal-gyi bu-tsha
byams| rkang-'gros nor-'phel na-tsha dkonl ming-sring Inga dur btsan phyug-Idan)
children, fulfilling their aspirations (tshe-ring-dang nor-rdzas 'phell Iha mi-byams-shing bu-tsha
bdun skye-shing bsam-pa 'grub-pa yin)
དཔལ་བསྐྱེད་དཔལ་གྱི་བུ་རྣཚོརུང་དང་རྣར་རྫས་འཕེལ།
ཚཉྩམས། །ནང་འགྲོས་ལྷ་མི་བྱམས་ཤིང་བུ་ཚབདུན
ནོར་འཕེལན་ཚ་དཀོན་མང| སྐྱེ་ཁ
སྐྱེ་ཞིང་བསམ་པ་འགྲོ་ལ་
Natasaray
Plate 6, fig. 163. 'Growth through glory', 4. 'Intimation of luck'.



207
Divinations concerning marriage
6. Chart of 'harm' (gnod-pa), symbolised by a red triangle
Plate7, fig. 24 (Msl: ff. 31-33): Charts of the nine permutated calculations (5-9)
5. Chart of average luck' (phyva-gYang), symbolised by a svāstika
SSE Blue 3
SSW Blue 3
ESE White 1
Svāstika (Yellow 5)
SSE Red 9
SSWWhite 8
WSW Green 4
ESE Red7
Red triangle (Yellow 5)
WSW Black 2
ENE White 1
WNW Green 4
ENE White 1
WNW Blue 3
NNE Black 2
NNW Black 2
NNE Green 4
NNW White 6
The layout of numeric squares in the second svāstika chart, of 'average luck', suggests that wealth will
The layout of numeric squares in the triangle chart of 'harm' suggests that there will be great loss of
come after the couple have looked for it, and that all will be well if prayers are said on behalf of the
wealth, and finally the couple will become beggars, alienated from each other, with few children,
friendless, and with heavy burdens (nor god-che-zhing tha-ma sprang gza' mi-snying ring bu-tsha
lake-dwelling mermaids and countryside deities (btsal-bas nor-rnyed sman-mo-dangl yul-Iha
bzang po gsol-na dge)
dkonl 'grogs-pas mi-theg khur-po yong)
བཙལ་བས་ནོར་སྐྱོད་སྨན་ ནོར་གོར་ཆེ་ཞིང་ཐ་མ་སྤང་
མོ་དང་། །ཡུལ་ལྷ་བབྱུང་། གཟའ་མསང་རིང་བུ་
པ་གསལ་ན་རྟགེ། 1དགོན་ འགགས་པས་
མི་ཐེག་ཁུར་པ་ཡང། །
Plate 7, fig. 245. 'Average luck', 6. 'Harm'.
7. Chart of 'five demons' ('dre-Inga), symbolised by five points
SSE Red 9
8. Chart of the 'cutting influence of demons' (bdud-gcod), symbolised by a dagger
SSE Red 9
SSWWhite6
SSW Red 7
ESE Green 4
Five points (Yellow 5)
WSW White 6
ESE Blue 3
Dagger (Yellow 5)
WSW Black 2
ENE Black2
WNW Blue 3
ENE Red7
WNW White 1
NNE White 8
NNW White 1
NNE Green 4
NNW White 8
The layout of numeric squares in the five points chart of 'five demons' suggests that demons and spirits
The layout of numeric squares in the dagger chart of the 'cutting influence of demons' suggests that the
will ingrees over the long term, the family line will be interrupted, wealth will be dissipated, many deaths
husband will become debilitated by ill-health, and lack property, while his wife will be constantly in sorrow.
There will be bankruptcy and the father's land will be usurped (khyo-shugs nad-mod rdzas mi-chags/
will occur, and the bride will engage in altercations with her husband ('dre-gdon phugs-su zhugs-pa yin/
rabs-chad nor-rdzas gtor shi-mangl khyo-dang kha-smras rgyun-du yong)
bud-medmya-ngantag-tu yong/ stong- 'bab pha-zhing mi-la chong
འདྲེ་གདོན་ཕྲུགས་ཞགས་ཁྱཤུགས་ནད་མེད་པས་
པ་མིན། །རབས་ཆར་ར་ལྔས མི་ཆགས། །བར་མེད་བླ་
གཏོརཤ་མང། དལྕེ་རང་འབདན་རྟག་ཏུ་ཡང་།སུང་
སྙས་རྒྱན་དུ་ཡོད། ། འབབ་ས་ཞཔ་མ་
Plate 7, fig. 24 7. 'Five demons', 8. Cutting influence of demons'.
9. Chart of *corporal punishment' (lus chad-pa), symbolised by a penis
SSE Black 2
SSW Red 9
ESE Green 4
Penis (Yellow 5)
WSW White 1
ENE Red7
WNW White 6
NNE White 8
NNW Blue 3
The layout of numeric squares in the worst chart, of 'corporal punishment', suggests that the couple's
potency will evaporate, and that they will be harmed by enemies, being subjected to quarrels and
accusations. There will be all sorts of diseases and an inability to achieve anything at all (lus-chad
dbang-thang mtha'-nas zadl dgra 'tshe gyod-dang nyes-pa yong nad-mod ci-yang 'grub-pa med
When the divination coincides with the first three charts of compatible marriage it is said to resemble the sun shining in a cloudless sky;
when it coincides with the middle three charts, it resembles the sunlight shining through the clouds; and when it coincides with the last
three charts, it resembles the bitumen of the earth.
ལུས་ཆད་དབང་ཐང་མཐའ་ནས་ཐར། །ངག་འཚོགྱོད་
དང་ཉེས་པ་ཡོང།ནད་མེད་ཅི་ཡང་འགྲུབ་པ་མེད།
Plate 7, fig.249. Corporal punishment .



208
The White Beryl
Further permutated calculation of marital compatibility (White Beryl, ff. 233b-234a)
If the previous calculation has no harmonious conclusion, the further permutated marriage calculation (yang-khug) should be applied.
There appear to be several methods of making this calculation. According to White Beryl, the natal log-men of the groom and bride should
be contrasted in the outer circle with the wood element, in the inner or intermediate circle with the mouse and ox year-signs, and in the
secret or innermost circle with the couple's own year-signs. The outcome will be compatible if the groom's calculation is higher in the
outer circle, and if the bride's is higher in the inner and secret circles. The method employed by Lo-chen Dharmaśrī, which is still cur-
rently utilised, leaves the numeric squares of the groom unchanged while permutating those of the bride, such that White One is inter-
changed with Black Two, Blue Three with Red Nine, and Green Four with White Eight. Only White Six and Red Seven are left
unchanged among the bride's numeric squares. The previous calculations of the four charts (shown above) are then repeated. In
Moonbeams, ff. 26–27a, Lo-chen elaborates:
The aforementioned is the method of casting the thirteen pebbles,
According to the Root Tantra of the Clarifying Lamp (gSal-sgron rtsa-ba).
Elsewhere, according to the practical techniques of certain] learned [diviners),
If these (calculations) are discordant,
One should then perform the divination
[Known as] the 'secret further permutated calculation' (gsang-ba yang-khug):
One should recognise in succession the calculation of individual (elemental aspects),
Leave the numeric squares of the groom where they are,
The permutated calculation, and the calculation of seniority.
Firstly, the calculation of individual (elemental aspects] (rkyang-pa)
And then permutate the numeric squares of the bride as follows:
[White] One ſis permutated with Black] Two,
And [Black] Two [is permutated with White] One.
Refers to the [aforementioned] contrast
Between the groom and bride's vitality elements, and so forth.26
[Blue) Three [is permutated with Red] Nine,
[Secondly), the permutated calculation (khug-pa) refers to
And [Red] Nine [is permutated with Blue] Three.
The aforementioned juxtaposition of the trigrams and numeric squares. 27
[Green] Four [is permutated with White) Eight,
And [White] Eight [is permutated with Green] Four.
The (White) Six and [Red] Seven are left unpermutated.
Thereafter, as before, one should carry out the calculation
Of the trigrams and numeric squares placed back to back.
Prognostications concerning seniority (White Beryl, f. 234a)
Ideally the groom should be older than the bride, and he should have been born in a year with a male sign, while the bride should have
been born in a year with a female sign. Otherwise, it is said that there will be more female than male descendants. To rectify this an image
of Vajrapāņi should be made, and the groom should wear a protective amulet dedicated to Vajrapāņi. Chart 5.7 is exemplary, again based
on the aforementioned subjects, the groom aged twenty-three and the bride aged twenty.
Year-sign calculation of seniority (ni-sha'i dgung-rtags)
5.7 Calculating the seniority of groom or bride
Age calculation of seniority (ni-sha'i dgung-grangs)
Age of groom: 23 auspicious
Age of bride: 20
auspicious
groom with male year-sign = dragon
bride with female year-sign = sheep
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises this calculation of seniority (Ch. ni-sha) as follows (Moonbeams, f. 27a):
Thirdly, the calculation of seniority is as follows:
It is best if the groom is older and born in a male year,
And if the bride is younger, and born in a female year.
The reverse is the worst scenario.
Prognostications concerning the luck aspects of the numeric squares (White Beryl, f. 237a)
If both spouses have the same natal numeric square in respect of their vitality, body, destiny and luck elements, they will have little to eat.
If their natal numeric squares form an enemy-relationship, it will be inauspicious, particularly if the groom has the natal numeric square
Red Seven and the bride has the natal numeric square Blue Three. These are demonic as far as the numeric squares are concerned, and
such marriages should be avoided. Otherwise, special rites should be undertaken to avoid this outcome. Also, if both spouses share the
natal numeric square Black Two, there will be misfortunes. The prognosis is better in the case of those whose numeric squares form a
mother-or son-relationship.
Prognostications concerning sectors of growth and decline (White Beryl, f. 237a/b)
The sectors of growth and decline (dar-gud) are examined in terms of the elements of vitality, body, destiny and luck corresponding to
the natal months of the bride and groom. For example, in the case of the vitality elements, if the vitality coincides with a sector of growth,
the marriage will bring long life; if it coincides with a sector of growth combined with a mother-relationship, it will be better for the par-
ents; if it is in a growth sector combined with a son-relationship, there will be prosperity; if in a growth sector combined with a friend-
relationship, there will be few descendants; and if in a growth sector combined with an enemy-relationship, there will be meagre
resources and little wealth.28 Note the following model chart (5.8), utilising the example of the aforementioned couple (groom born in fire
dragon year and bride in earth sheep year).



SW
5.8 Calculating the sectors of growth and decline in relation to the natal month
Above Detail of Plate 8, fig. 6 (see p. 210), showing indispensible
divinations for entering into marriage
Growth and decline sectors pertaining to the
Growth and decline sectors pertaining to the
bride's natal month (bu-mo skyes-zla'i
groom's natal month (bu skyes-zla'i
srog-gi dar-gud)
vitality of the groom's iron
srog-gi dar-gud)
vitality of the bride's
iron
natal month
natal month
foetus (lus-rdzogs)
0
clothing (gos-gyon)
00
Similarly, if the body element is in a growth sector, there will be few diseases; if it is in a growth sector combined with a mother-
relationship, the couple's land will be excellent; if in a son-relationship, there will be many children; if in a friend-relationship, the chil-
dren will flourish; and if in an enemy-relationship, it will be better for the spouse. Similar predictions are made for growth in relation to
the destiny and luck elements.
Marriage pertaining to each of the twelve sectors of growth and decline also has its distinctive results. For exam-
ple, if it coincides with the sector of conception, it will be hard to raise children; if it coincides with the sector of foetus, there will be many
diseases; if it coincides with the sector of embryo, there will also be various ailments; if it coincides with the sector of birth, the children
will be properly raised; if it coincides with the sector of ablution, there will be good reputation; if it coincides with the sector of clothing,
there will be wealth and food; if it coincides with the sector of work, there will be an abundance of necessities; if it coincides with the sec-
tor of growth, it will be auspicious; but if it coincides with the sector of decline, there will be bad reputation. Ifit coincides with the sector
of ill-health, there will be many diseases; if it coincides with the sector of death, the tree of prosperity will be cut down; and if it coincides
with the sector of tomb, it will be decidedly inauspicious. These predictions are further subdivided according to the superior, middling
and inferior sectors, as indicated in White Beryl, f. 237b. Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises this topic as follows (Moonbeams, f. 27a):
In addition to this, one should calculate the growth and decline sectors
In relation to the vitality elements, and so forth,
Of the groom and brides' natal month.
This is stated in the Twenty-Verse Auto-commentary (Rang-'grel nyi-shu-pa).
After making these calculations accurately,
One should make a conclusive analysis
In accordance with the positive and negative results
[Described] in the fourth chapter of this commentary.



210
The White Beryl
Prognostications concerning indispensable divinations for entering into marriage (White Beryl, ff. 237–238a)
The so-called twelve khri-sgo are considered indispensable when calculating the time for taking a bride. There are three aspects: destroy-
ing the enemy's sector (dgra-khyim gzhom-pa), adopting the wealth sector (nor-khyim blang-ba), and marriage within the same sector
(rang-khyim 'bubs/'bugs). Destroying the enemy sector entails the destruction of the enemy sectors of the years, months, days and tri-
grams. These are depicted on Plate 8, figs 6–8. Among them, the mouse and pig are the year-signs of the bride that destroy the enemy sec-
tor of the year, suggesting an open opportunity for marriage in the ox and sheep years. Similarly, the tiger and hare year-signs suggest an
open opportunity for marriage in the bird or monkey years; the horse and snake do so for marriage in the mouse and pig years; the bird
and monkey do so for marriage in the horse and snake years; and the ox, dog, sheep and dragon do so for marriage in the tiger or hare year.
The natal months of the bride that destroy the enemy sectors of the month, creating ideal opportunities for mar-
riage in a particular month, are identical to those of the years.
ལོའི་དགྲ་ཁྱིམ་གཞོན་A-6
པ་བག་མའི་ལོ།
འགྲོ་བའི་ལོ།
ཟླ་བའིདགྲ་མ
TagNATUS
2
བརྫང་བའི་ཟླ་བ།
Plate 8, fig. 6
bird or monkey
ox, sheep, dog or dragon
horse or snake
tiger or hare
Plate 8, fig. 6 (Ms I: ff. 35–36): Prognostications concerning indispensable divinations for entering into marriage (White Beryl, ff. 2375–238a)
The following year-signs of the bride, which destroy the enemy mouse or pig
tiger or hare
horse or snake
sector of the years (lo'i dgra-khyim gzhom-pa bag-ma'i lo)
suggest an open opportunity for marriage in the following
ox or sheep
bird or monkey
mouse or pig
years ('gro-ba'i lo)
The following natal months of the bride, which destroy the
mouse or pig
tiger or hare
horse or snake
enemy sector of the months
(zla-ba'i dgra-khyim gzhom-pa bag-ma'i skyes-zla)
suggest an open opportunity for marriage in the following
ox or sheep
bird or monkey mouse or pig
months (brdzang-ba'i zla-ba)
bird or monkey
ox, sheep, dog or dragon
horse or snake
or hare
As far as the appropriate days for marriage are concerned, there are certain natal months that destroy the enemy sectors of the days, indi-
cating the ideal day of the month for marriage. For example (Plate 8, fig. 8), when the tiger month destroys the enemy sector of the days,
it indicates an ideal opportunity for marriage on the monkey day. When the hare month does so, it indicates an ideal opportunity on the
bird day; and in the same way, the dragon month suggests the dog day, the snake month the pig day, the horse month the mouse day, the
sheep month the ox day, the monkey month the tiger day, the bird month the hare day, the dog month the dragon day, the pig month the
snake day, the mouse month the horse day, and the ox month the sheep day.
BAITSIKATES
ཁྱིམ་གཞིམ་
F
ANNA
30
COM
.
འགྲོ་བའི་ཉི་མ
།
Plate 8, fig. 8
Plate 8, fig. 8 (Ms I: ff. 35–36): Prognostications concerning indispensable divinations for entering into marriage (continued; White Beryl, ff. 2375–238a)
The following natal months of the bride, which destroy
tiger hare dragon snake horse sheep monkey_bird
the enemy sector of the days
dog
pig
mouse
ox
(zhag-dang nyi-ma'i khyim-gzhom skyes-zla)
suggest an open opportunity for marriage on the following
monkey
bird
dog
pig
m
ouse
ox
tiger
hare
dragon
snake
horse
sheep
days ('gro-ba'i nyi-ma)
The natal trigrams also suggest ideal planets and trigrams for marriage when they destroy the enemy sectors of the trigrams, as shown
on Plate 8, fig. 7. For example, the natal trigrams Dva and Zin suggest the planet Saturn and the trigram Zin as ideal opportunities for
marriage. The natal trigrams Khon and Gin suggest Jupiter and Dva; the natal trigrams Li and Kham suggest Mars and Kham; while the
natal trigrams Khen and Zon suggest Mercury and Khon.



211
Divinations concerning marriage
སྨར་ཁའི་ཁྱིམ་གཞོམ་
སྐྱེས་སྦྱོར།
9a
བག་མའི་བབ་སླར་
རྫོང་ལུགས།
Plate 8, fig. 7
Li or Kham
Khen or Zon
Plate 8, fig. 7 (Ms l: ff. 35-36): Prognostications concerning indispensable divinations for entering into marriage (continued; White Beryl, ff. 2376–238a)
The following natal trigrams of the bride, which destroy the enemy
Dva or Zin
Khon or Gin
sector of the trigrams (spar-kha'i khyim-gzhom skyes-spar)
suggest the following planets or weekdays (gza)
Saturm or Saturday Jupiter or Thursday
and the following current trigrams as an open opportunity for
the bride's marriage (bag-ma'i bab-spar rdzong-lugs)
Dva
Mars or Tuesday
Mercury or Wednesday
Zin
Kham
Khon
As for the adopting of the wealth sectors, the couple are said to obtain the sons and wealth they would wish for when their year-signs
form a reciprocal seventh-removed relationship (bdun-zur), whether counted forwards or backwards. The mouse sign suggests harmo-
nious circumstances in the three summer months, the horse in the three spring months, the ox in the three winter months, the sheep in
the three autumn months, the tiger in the three spring months, the monkey in the three summer months, the hare in the three summer
months, the bird in the three autumn months, the dog in the three summer months, the dragon in the three winter months, the pig in the
three winter months, and the snake in the autumn months. When the times are inauspicious, rituals should be performed to protect the
seventh-removed aspect (bdun-zur).
As far as marriages within the same sector (rang-khyim dbub-pa) are concerned, those between couples of the
mouse sign indicate difficulty in having children or obtaining wealth, those between couples of the ox sign indicate great wealth and an
average number of children, those between couples of the tiger sign indicate bad auspices for people and property, those between couples
of the hare sign indicate an average result, those between couples of the dragon sign and the dog sign indicate good auspices, those
between couples of the snake and monkey signs are also auspicious, those between couples of the horse and pig signs suggest a result
higher than average, and finally those between couples of the sheep and bird signs portend hunger. Accordingly, various remedial rites
should be undertaken.
When marriage is undertaken between neighbouring year-signs, also within the same sector (rang-khyim
'bubs/'bugs) – whether between mouse and ox, tiger and hare, dragon and snake, horse and sheep, monkey and bird or dog and pig – the
couple have identical destiny and body elements, as indicated on Plate 8, fig. 9. In particular, if they both have wood elements, it will be
inauspicious because there is a temptation for theft. If they both have fire elements, it will be auspicious because they generate heat. If
they both have earth elements, their castle or house walls will be sturdy. If they both have iron elements, they will be sharp and incisive;
and if they both have water elements, it will be inauspicious (gang-zhing 'bobs).
Plate 8, fig. 9
བདག་བྱིས་
འདི་དག་དབང་ལ་
དཙཧབ་དར།
སའི་ས་
འབུགས།
Plate 8, fig. 9 (Ms I: ff. 35-36): Prognostications concerning indispensable divinations for entering into marriage (continued; White Beryl, ff. 2376–238a)
mouse
tiger
dragon
horse
dog
monkey
and bird
since couples of these neighbouring year-
signs have an identical destiny and body
and ox
and hare
and snake
and sheep
and pig
Diverse predictions are made when marriage is
undertaken between couples of the following
neighbouring year-signs, within the same sector
(bdag-khyim 'bugs)
element ('di-dag dbang-lus gcig-pa
gza'-mi yas- mes sdebs)



212
The White Beryl
Bride's departure time determined through the hidden point of earth,
utilising the nine numeric squares (White Beryl, ff. 238a-246b)
According to White Beryl, the divination science portending the auspicious times for giving away a bride (rdzongs), also known as “divina-
tion of the nuptial road' (lam-rtsis), has seventeen aspects. These comprise: 'kham-yu' divination (kham-yu), the twenty unfortunate nup-
tial ties (byur-thag nyi-shu), the calculations of the nuptial trigrams (spar-kha), numeric squares (sme-ba), and their combi-
nations ('dom-sbrags), and those of the years (lo), months (zla-ba), days (tshes nyi–ma), hours (dus-tshod), planets (gza), and
constellations (skar-ma), as well as of the spirit lords of the soil (sa-bdag), the direction of the nuptial chart (phyogs), and the special
calculation of the 'celestial dog' spirit (gnam-khyi), the five essential persons (dgos-pa'i mi-rigs lnga), the nuptial transport (sna-len),
and the nuptial seat (bzhag-sa). Lo-chen Dharmaśrī (Moonbeams, f. 27a) subsumes these seventeen aspects under three headings which
he introduces as follows:
When this (marriage divination technique) is actually implemented,
There are three instructions respectively concerning:
The determination of the twenty unfortunate nuptial ties (byur-thag nyi-shu),
The ten techniques applied when giving away a bride (brdzang-lugs bcu),
And the five essential persons (dgos-pa'i mi Inga).
Each of the seventeen aspects is here discussed in turn.
1. 'Kham-yu' divination of the wedding day (kham-yu)
The so-called 'kham-yu' technique for ascertaining the auspicious and inauspicious times for the bride's departure from the family home,
which is depicted on Plate 9, fig. 2, utilises one divination chart for the groom and another for the bride. These charts combine the con-
stellations with the planets or days of the week and the animal signs governing the respective years, months, days and hours, to indicate
the various types of conjunction. The chart of the groom extends clockwise through the first fourteen constellations, from Kșttikā (smin-
drug) to Viśākhā (sa-ga), starting from the natal sign and counting downwards to the subject's present age, while that of the bride extends
anti-clockwise through the last fourteen constellations, from Anurādhā (lha-mtshams) to Bharaṇī (bra-nye). For example, in the groom's
chart, the combination of the constellation Kșttikā and Sunday portends an inauspicious wedding day, while the combination of the mon-
key sign, the constellation Uttaraphalgunī (dbo) and Tuesday is considered auspicious. In the case of the female chart, the combination of
the constellation Anurādhā and Sunday portends an inauspicious wedding day, while the combination of the bird sign, the constellation
Uttarabhadrapada (khrums-smad) and Wednesday is deemed auspicious.
On the basis of this divination, the bride may be given away in one of three manners. First, in the case of the so-
called ye-le spyan-gcig bag-ma, who is pure, all the auspicious coincidences of marriage are esteemed. Second, in the case of the lha-bza'
dug-khyer bag-ma, who augurs divorce, power is deemed to be crucial for which reason it is said the bride should be bound securely to the
groom's horse. Third, in the case of the dmu-bza' dung-'bud bag-ma, who augurs widowhood, the vitality element is crucial, for which rea-
son if the vitality element of the bride is incompatible, it is said she should be ritually transported in chains! In ways such as these the aus-
picious coincidences should be established.
Plate 9, fig. 2 (Ms I: ff. 37–38): 'Kham-yu' divination of the wedding date
1
2
6
5
7
8
4
9
10
12
14
11
bird
13
pig
The following
mouse
tiger
hare
dragon
snake
horse
sheep
monkey
dog
earth 29
groom's sign in
conjunction with
M
Svāti (sa-r)
Višākhā (sa-ga)
Krtikā (smin-drug) Rohini (snar-ma) Mrgaśiras (mgo)
and Sunday, and Monday, and Tuesday,
symbolised by symbolised by seven symbolised by five
triangle in black circle, dots, portends an c ircles, portends an
portends an
average wedding day auspicious wedding
inauspicious wedding (zla-ba mig-bdun day (mig-dmar 'khor
day (nyi-ma rabs-
Inga bzang).
Aśleșā (skag
and Saturday,
symbolised by nine
b lack dots, portends
an inauspicious
Ārdrā (lag) Punarvasū (nabs-so) Pușyā (rgya)
and Wednesday, and Thursday, and Friday,
symbolised by a symbolised by a saltire, symbolised by eight
hexagon, portends an portends an average dots, portends an
average wedding day wedding day (phur-bu auspicious wedding
(Ihag-pa zur-drug bzhi-snol 'bring). day (pa-sangs
'bring).
brgyad-pa bzang).
aghā (mchu
and Sunday,
symbolised by ten
dots, portends an
Pūrvaphalguņī (gre)
and Monday,
symbolised by a
broom, portends an
Uttaraphalguņi (dbo)
and Tuesday,
symbolised by six
dots, portends an
Hasrā (me-bzhi)
and Wednesday,
symbolised by a
rectangle, portends
and Friday,
symbolised by twelve
Citrā (nag)
and Thursday,
symbolised by three
rings, portends an
and Saturday,
symbolised by a
inauspicious wedding
an average wedding
average wedding
auspicious wedding
day (nyi-ma bcu-pa
bzang).
dots, portends an
auspicious wedding
day (pa-sangs
bcu-gnyis bzang).
wedding day
polygon, portends an
inauspicious wedding
day (pen-ba zur-'brel
auspicious wedding
day (mig-dmar
mig-drug bzang).
day (zla-ba
phyags-shing ngan).
day (Ihag-pa
day(phur-bu
'khor-gsum 'bring).
'bring).
zur-bzhi 'bring).
ngan).
(spen-pa
nag-dgu ngan).
chad nag-po ngan).
26
25
24
23
22
21
20
19
18
17
16
15
28
The following
27
pig
dog
bird
monkey
sheep
horse
snake
dragon
hare
tiger
ox
mouse
earth
bride's sign in
conjunction with
Bharani (bra-nye)
Aśvini (dbyug-gu
Revati (nam-gru)
Dhanasta (mon-gre)
Śravaņā (byi-zhin)
Abhijit (gro-zhun)
Uttarāsādhā
Pūrvāasādhā
Mūlā (snrubs)
Jyeșthā (snron)
Anurādhā
Uttarabhadrapada
(khrums-smad
Pūrvabhadrapada
(khrums-stod
Śatavisā
(mon-gru)
and Monday,
(chu-smad)
(chu-stod)
(Iha-mtshams)
and Saturday,
and Friday,
and Thursday,
and Wednesday,
and Tuesday,
and Saturday,
and Friday,
and Thursday,
and Sunday,
symbolised by
and Wednesday,
symbolised by one
and Tuesday,
symbolised by four
and Monday,
symbolised by a
and Sunday,
symbolised by a red
symbolised by a
symbolised by six
symbolised by seven
symbolised by five
symbolised by seven
symbolised by five
symbolised by a
sun of infertility,
symbolised by a symbolised by six
wheel, portends an dots, portends an
inauspicious wedding average wedding
day (spen-pa day (pa-sangs
'khor-lo ngan). 'khor-drug 'bring).
one-legged malign
goblin, 30 portends
dots, portends an
auspicious wedding
or eight dots, portends dots, portends an
an inauspicious average wedding
wedding day (mig day (zla-ba Inga-
demons, portends an rectangle, portends
inauspicious wedding an average wedding
day (pa-sangs day (phur-bu
circle, portends an c orners, portends an
inauspicious wedding average wedding day
hawk's tail, portends
an inauspicious
fingers, portends an spots, portends an
inauspicious wedding auspicious wedding
day (nyi-ma day (spen-pa pho-
lag-sor ngan). bdun bzang).
portends an
UL-00
day (Ihag-pa
(mig-dmar
an inauspicious
wedding day (phur-
day (Ihag-pa
spun-drug bzang).
wedding day (zla-ba inauspicious wedding
khra-mo mjug ngan). day (nyi-ma rabs-
dmar brgyad-
pa 'bring).
'dre-Inga ngan).
zur-bzhi 'bring).
gcig-pa ngan).
ra-bzhi 'bring).
bu the 'u-rang
bdun ngan).
chad dmar-po ngan).
rkang-gcig ngan)



213
Divinations concerning marriage
མཚུ | གྲྭ་དབོ་མ་བཞིན་པ། | ས་རེས་ག་
DOOooh
co Do C
loo
སྨིན་དྲུག སྣར་མ། མགོ་ | ལག་ བསོ། རྒྱལ། སྟག་
pood 2010
Albocolloooo
དང་དྲུག་འཕྱོལ་འབྲིང་། | བརྒྱད་པ་དགེ་ལྡན་
སག་པ་ཕུལ་བཞི་ པ་སངས་མིན་པ་ཟུག་
zy 2 331
bracias
440
48153
sanasi anyagilagalan
šs 123
Do
943
SV
བླ་ན་
gas Saalisk
ཆུ་སྐྱེད ། སྣུས་ | སྨོན་
ལྷམཚེས་
ཅུའུ་ ནམགུ་ ཁྲུམསང་ ཁྲུམསེང་མོན་གྲུ་ | མོན་གྱི་
olo poco
booboooboo
VOTS
NOUVON
SOUVC
OVUOVY
29
Codec
9:41 332
boo
AS
Gelade
1899
14 a
ASTRE
ka 1
Plate 9, fig. 2
2. Twenty unfortunate nuptial ties (byur-thag nyi-shu)
Among these, all of which are depicted on Plate 7, fig. 23, the first is known as the bride who is the great harbinger of black vultures
(lding-nag chen-mo'i bag-ma). This portends that if the bride's outer planetary aspect is aligned with her mother's outer planetary aspect
when the latter is incompatible with the element governing the time of the mother's own wedding, disasters will afflict the relatives,
there will be no descendants, little merit, and the bride will die prematurely. To remedy this, a puppy or a kid goat should be placed in the
hands of the bride to secure an auspicious coincidence.
The second is known as the bride who is the average harbinger of black vultures (lding-nag 'bring-po'i bag-ma).
This portends that divorce will ensue and it will be inauspicious for the relatives if the bride's departure coincides with the numeric
square governing her mother's own wedding. However, if the devouring demons (za-'dre) in the location where the wedding takes place
are controlled, it will be auspicious.
The third is known as the bride who is the slight harbinger of black vultures (lding-nag chung-ba'i bag-ma). This
portends that it will be inauspicious for the husband, and divorce will ensue if the bride's departure coincides with the trigram governing
her mother's own wedding. However, if rituals are performed to counteract divorce, the marriage will become compatible.
The fourth is known as the bride who is the great harbinger of ill-omens (ltas-ngan chen-mo'i bag-ma). This por-
tends that the bride will bring natural obstacles to herself and to her husband when the wedding coincides with her own obstacle year, for
which reason rituals averting such obstacles should be performed, their number corresponding to the age of the bride at the time of her
departure from the family home.
The fifth, known as the bride who is the average harbinger of ill-omens (ltas-ngan 'bring-po'i bag-ma), portends
that the bride will bring obstacles to herself and her husband when the wedding coincides with her seventh-removed year (bdun-zur) but
that good auspices will prevail if rites averting obstacles to the bdun-zur year are undertaken.
The sixth, known as the bride who is the slight harbinger of ill-omens (ltas-ngan chung-ba'i bag-ma), portends that
the bride will bring obstacles to herself when the wedding coincides with a multiple of the number nine (dgu-mig) or the tomb-sign (dur-
mig), for which reason ritual texts, such as the rDo-rje sder-mo'i gzungs, should be recited on such days.
The seventh is known as the bride who is rude-mouthed (kha-nyes bag-ma). This portends that if the wedding
takes place under a hostile trigram,91 the bride will be rude-mouthed, even if she is sixty years of age! Such a bride will be inauspicious for
the husband's home, bringing the sufferings of ill-health upon herself and eventually dying due to a riding accident. Therefore, the bride
should be given away dressed in men's clothing and the Retentive Mantra of the Sūtra of the King of Meditative Stability (Ting-'dzin rgyal-po'i
gzung) should be recited. For example, if the departure takes place under the trigram Khon in the mouse or pig year, the bride should
wear a red headdress, and red flags should be brandished by relatives in the south-west.
The eighth is known as the depressed bride (yi-mug-pa'i bag-ma). This portends that a son will die and it will be
inauspicious for the father and brother if a bride's departure coincides with one of her three compatible year-signs and her own natal tri-
gram.32 Therefore, flags should be brandished in each of the directions and headwear should correspond to these directions in colour, with
blue for the mouse and pig, red for the horse and snake, and so forth. Meanwhile, the bride's father should carve a notch into a white arrow.
The ninth is known as the bride who sharpens a chisel (zong-brdar bag-ma). 33 This portends that if the bride's
departure coincides with the trigram in a friend-relationship to her own year-sign or with one suggesting a male-female conflict, such as
Li and Khen or Dva and Zin, Gin and Zon or Kham and Khon, they will be subjected to the ‘cutting influence of demons'. Therefore, the
bride should set out after yoking together a black-headed ram and a piebald ox (glang-bre), and the Retentive Mantra of the Thousand-
Armed and Thousand-Eyed One (Phyag-stong spyan-stong gzungs) should be recited.
The tenth is known as the bride who carries a razor-sharp knife to the [effigy's] nose' (sna-la spu-gri khyer-ba'i
bag-ma). This portends that the marriage will be inauspicious for the brother-in-law and father-in-law if the bride's departure coincides
with a time when her vitality element inhibits the present year and her natal numeric square is Red Seven. A razor-sharp knife should be



214
The White Beryl
given to the bride and seven effigies of a tiger or hare should be carried to an eastern crossroad, where the razor should be heated and used
to cut the noses of the effigies. Auspicious coincidences will then emerge if iron is placed in the east, water in the south, charcoal in the
west, yellow earth in the north, and juniper in the intermediate directions.
The eleventh is known as the 'bride who holds a ladle' (e-skyogs thogs-pa'i bag-ma). This portends that it will be
inauspicious for the father and brother if the bride's vitality element is inhibited by the vitality element of the present year. Therefore rituals
such as the ransom of vitality (srog-bslu) should be undertaken, and recitations such as the 'Chi-med rnga-sgra tshe-mdo should be performed.
The twelfth is known as the bride who brandishes a firebrand' (mgal-me klad-bskor bag-ma). This portends that
the husband and brother-in-law may well die prematurely if the bride sets out under Black Two and the trigram Khon, when her body
element inhibits that of the present year. It will be auspicious if those two persons do not lead the procession. Rather, a fire should be lit in
a pit and defilements should be incinerated.
The thirteenth is known as the bride carrying a sack of earth' (sa-sgye khur-ba'i bag-ma). This portends that the
vitality of her brother will be threatened, and the vitality of the mother and younger sister carried off if the bride's departure coincides
with Yellow Five and the trigram Zin and when the body element of the present year inhibits that of the bride. To remedy this, seven
tiger or hare bones should be carried to an eastern market road and a white flag should be hoisted to enhance the body element.
The fourteenth is known as the bride who holds a sweeping brush' (phyags-shing thogs-pa'i bag-ma). This por-
tends that it will be inauspicious for the husband, brother-in-law, wealth, descendants, father and brother if the bride sets out under
Green Four when her destiny element is inhibited by that of the present year. As a remedy, seven dragon effigies should be consumed in
the south-east, and the bride should be escorted by one of the same age.
The fifteenth is known as the bride who carries off wealth and good luck with an iron hook' (lcags-kyus nor-gYang
khyer-ba'i bag-ma). This portends that her father's and brother's luck will be carried off if the bride departs at a time when the destiny ele-
ment of the present year is inhibited by that of the bride, causing bad reputation to grow. However, if an effigy of one born in a horse or
snake year is placed in the skull of a mouse or pig and consumed after being pulverised by a smith, good luck and prosperity will prevail.
The sixteenth is known as the bride who wears a sickle on her crown' (spyi-bor zor-ba'i bya-ru btsugs-pa'i bag-ma).
This portends that there will be loud marriage paeans followed by loud altercations if the bride sets out at a time when her luck element
inhibits that of the present year. However if flour is rubbed on the body while the marriage paeans are being recited, and a sickle is
attached to the crown of the head, prosperity will be ensured.
The seventeenth is known as the bride who carries the wooden slate of death' (khram-shing khyer-ba'i bag-ma).
This portends that the good luck of the father and brother will end and a preceptor will die prematurely if the bride sets out at a time
when the luck element of the present year inhibits her own luck element. To remedy this, good luck should be attracted by a sword and
the skye-rabs rgyal-por gdams-pa should be recited. In general, if this coincides with the bride's adversarial year (gshed-lo), the charms (gto)
which rectify a hostile adversarial year should sustain her.
The eighteenth is known as the bride who consumes her husband' (khyo-zan-ma'i bag-ma). This portends that the
bride will be inauspicious for her husband if she sets out at the same age as her father when he first set up home, and coinciding with the
natal trigram of her husband or under the Zon trigram coinciding with one of the eight inauspicious fire years (me-brgyad).34 To rectify
this she should be given away after smearing yellow earth on an effigy of the animal governing her own birth, and seven effigies of dogs,
goats or sheep, and placing these on the road.
The nineteenth is known as the 'inauspicious bride who ends the family line' (rabs-chad nag-mo'i bag-ma). This
portends that the family line will end if she sets out under the natal numeric square of both her parents, and that her children will be
inauspicious if she sets out under a natal numeric square coinciding with Yellow Five. To rectify this, the Sūtra of the Greater Vehicle enti-
tled Subjugation of the Great Chiliocosm (Mahāsahasrapramardana-nāma-mahāyānasūtra) should be recited, and rituals connected with the
numeric squares should be performed.
Lastly, the twentieth is known as the bride who brings divorce' (bye-bral bag-ma). This portends that divorce will
ensue if the bride sets out in the year, month, day or hour of the bird or monkey, under the trigram Li or Kham and the log-men bird or
monkey. Good-luck charms (gto) should be made and the marriage paean recited loudly. However, the worst of such marriages should be
avoided, otherwise they could lead to fatal injuries or ill-health, poverty and hardship for the children. This topic is summarised by Lo-
chen Dharmaśrī in the following verses (Moonbeams, f. 27a/b):
First, as for the twenty unfortunate nuptial ties:
Twenty determinations should be made concerning:
"[Those brides) who are the great, average and slight harbingers of black vultures' 35
'Those brides) who are rude-mouthed, depressed and chisel-sharpening',
'[Those brides] who are the great, average and slight harbingers of ill-omen',
*[The bride who carries] a razor-sharp knife to [an effigy's] nose',
"[The bride who] holds a ladle',
"[The bride who] brandishes a firebrand',
"[The bride who carries) a sack of earth on her back',
"[The bride who holds] a sweeping brush',
' [The bride who carries off wealth and good luck] with an iron hook in her hand'.
*[The bride who wears] a sickle on her crown',
[The bride who carries) the wooden slate of death:36
'[The bride who consumes and] causes the death of her husband',
"[The bride who] ends the family line',
And "[the bride who brings] divorce'.
Opposite Detail of Plate 7, fig. 21 (see p. 217) and Plate 7, fig. 22
(see p. 220), showing the potential obstacles when a bride sets out
under her own natal trigram or at a certain age



ཉེ་
་་་
ब
:
*
ཀྱིལ་
ཀློབཅོ་བརྒྱད་
བཞི་
1:|:
༢
༦
།
ཁག
ཀྱི
པ་
་
*
དེ་
་



216
The White Beryl
Plate 7, fig. 23
The bride who is the 'great harbinger of black
vultures' (Iding-chen) portends that if her
outer planetary aspect is aligned with her
mother's outer planetary aspect when the
ལྟས་དན
ཆེ་བ་
latter is incompatible with the element
SHA
ཐོང་ཐལ ད
ཆོསྣ་ལ་རྩ
governing the time of the mother's own
wedding, disasters will afflict the relatives,
299
FANIK
| SS
there will be no descendants, little merit,
and the bride will die prematurely. To remedy
this, a puppy or a kid goat should be placed
in the hands of the bride to secure an
auspicious coincidence.
The 'bride who carries a razor-sharp knife
The bride who holds a ladle' (e-skyogs)
The 'bride who brandishes a firebrand'
The 'bride carrying a sack of earth'
Plate 7, fig. 23 (Ms I: ff. 31-34): Twenty unfortunate nuptial ties (byur-thag nyi-shu)
The depressed bride (yi-mug) portends that The bride who sharpens a chisel (zor-brda) 87
a son will die and it will be inauspicious for the portends that if her departure coincides
father and brother if her departure coincides with the trigram in a friend-relationship
The 'bride who holds a sweeping brush'
(phyags-shing portends that it will be
('gal-me) portends that the husband and
(sa-sgye/za-skye) portends that the vitality
to [an effigy's) nose' (sna-la spu) portends
that the marriage will be inauspicious for
portends that it will be inauspicious for
the father and brother if she has obstacles
brother-in-law may die prematurely if
of her brother will be threatened, and that
inauspicious for the husband, brother-in-law,
with one of her three compatible year-signs
to her own year-sign or with one
the brother-in-law and father-in-law if her
owing to the vitality element of the present
she sets out under Black Two and the
of the mother and younger sister carried off,
wealth, descendants, father and brother if
and her own natal trigram. Therefore, flags
departure coincides with a time when her
trigram Khon, when her body element
if her departure coincides with Yellow Five
she sets out under Green Four when her
suggesting a male-female conflict, such as
Li and Khen or Dva and Zin, Gin and Zon or
should be brandished in each of the
vitality element inhibits the present year. A
year. Therefore, rituals such as the ransom
of the vitality (srog-bslu) should be
undertaken, and recitations such as the
inhibits that of the present year. It will
and the trigram Zin and when the body
destiny element is impeded by the present
year. As a remedy, seven dragon effigies
directions, and headwear should correspond
Kham and Khon, the family will be subjected
razor-sharp knife should be given to the bride
be auspicious if those two persons
element of the present year brings
to these directions in colour - blue for the
to the 'cutting influence of demons'.
and carried to an eastern crossroad, before
'Chi-med rnga-sgra tshe-mdo should
do not lead the procession. Rather, a
obstacles to herself. To remedy this, seven
should be consumed in the south-east,
mouse and pig, red for the horse and snake,
Therefore, the bride should set out after
being burnt in fire and used to cut the nose of
be performed.
fire should be lit in a pit and defilements
tiger or hare bones should be carried to
and the bride should be escorted by one
and so forth. Meanwhile, the bride's father
an effigy. Auspicious coincidences will then
should be incinerated.
an eastern market road and a white flag
of the same age.
should carve a notch into a white arrow.
yoking a black headed ram to a piebald ox,
and the Phyag-stong spyan-stong gzungs
should be recited.
emerge if iron is placed in the east, water in the
should be hoisted.
south, charcoal in the west, yellow earth in the
north, and juniper in the intermediate directions.
3. Calculation of the nuptial trigrams (spar-kha'i lam-rtsis)
If a man born under the trigram Li takes as his bride a woman born in the ox year under the trigram Zin, the couple will have prosper-
ous children, good reputation and long life. Also, if the bride sets out under a trigram forming a mother- or son-relationship, the out-
come will be auspicious, and it will augur long life if she sets out under a trigram with an identity-relationship. One should abandon
a proposed marriage date if the bride is, for example, of the tiger or hare year with the trigram Kham in a mother-relationship, or with
Li in a son-relationship, Zin in an identity-relationship, one of the intermediate trigrams in a friend-relationship, or Dva in an
enemy relationship. In particular, there will be bad luck if she sets out under a trigram in an enemy-relationship, her parental home
will be subject to the ‘cutting influence of demons', and divorce or altercations will ensue. If she sets out under a trigram hostile to
the vitality element, there will be demonic influences, for which reason a cow or bull should be set free and children should be visible
at the time of her departure. If she sets out under a trigram hostile to the body element, there will be ill-health, for which reason
she should be dressed in yellow and perform the 'seven grain rite' ('bru-bdun cho-ga) at the time of her departure. If she sets out under
a trigram hostile to the destiny element, there will be altercations, for which reason she should be dressed in white at the time of
her departure. Lastly, if she sets out under a trigram hostile to the luck element, the bride will be prone to disease on the way and there
is the risk of evil spirits provoking bad omens en route, for which reason the gTsug-gtor nag-mo should be recited, the number of
times equalling the bride's age, and she should depart wearing a protective amulet. Furthermore, divorce will ensue if a bride of the
ox, tiger or hare year sets out under the trigram Gin, or one of the dragon, snake or horse year sets out under the trigram Zon, or one
of the sheep, monkey or bird year sets out under the trigram Khen.
If a bride sets out under her own natal trigram, various rituals are prescribed, as illustrated on Plate 7, fig. 21. For
example, if a bride born under the trigram Li sets out under Li, she should hold an axe in her hand, which should be stolen by the groom's
younger sister, and burnt. If a bride born under the trigram Khon sets out under Khon, she should hold a clay pitcher (rdzi'u) in her hand,
and on the way it should be stolen by the groom's younger sister and placed at a crossroads. If a bride born under the trigram Dva sets
out under Dva, she should wear a stag's antler headdress, which should be knocked from her head by the groom's younger sister and
crushed underfoot. If a bride born under the trigram Khen sets out under Khen, she should hold an empty sack (rkyal-stong) in her hand,
which is then stolen from her by the groom's younger sister. If a bride born under the trigram Kham sets out under Kham, she should be
shackled, the chains later being severed with an axe by the groom's younger sister. If a bride born under the trigram Gin sets out under
Gin, she should carry a sack of earth on her back, which should later be poured out by the groom's younger sister. If a bride born under
the trigram Zin sets out under Zin, she should hold a sweeping brush in her hand, which should later be stolen by the groom's younger
sister. Lastly, if a bride born under the trigram Zon sets out under Zon, she should carry a razor attached to her nose, which should then
be stolen by the groom's younger sister and laid face-upwards.
4. Calculation of the nuptial numeric squares (sme-ba'i lam-rtsis)
In general, the three white numeric squares and Red Nine are auspicious, but White One may suggest difficulty in raising children, little
merit, and ill-health. Black Two suggests widowhood or divorce. Blue Three suggests constant altercations or divorce, while Green
Four portends that the children will have little destiny and be pursued by self-inflicted evil spirits. Yellow Five suggests the harmful
influence of the spirit lords of the soil and king spirits (rgyal-po), while Red Seven indicates the sudden appearance of enemies and Red
Nine the severing of the good luck of the father and brother. Good luck charms (gto) enumerated in White Beryl, f. 141a, should be made
corresponding to these numeric squares when they govern the day of the bride's departure from the family home.



217
Divinations concerning marriage
The bride who is the 'average harbinger of
The bride who is the 'slight harbinger of black
The bride who is the 'great harbinger of ill.
The bride who is the 'average harbinger of
The bride who is the 'slight harbinger of ill.
The bride who is rude-mouthed (kha-nyes)
omens' (Itas-ngan chung) portends that she
black vultures' (lding-'bring) portends that
divorce will ensue and it will be inauspicious
for the relatives if the bride's departure
vultures' (lding-chung) portends that it will be
inauspicious for the husband and divorce will
ensue if the bride's departure coincides with
omens' (Itas-ngan che-ba) portends that she
will bring natural obstacles to herself and
to her husband, for which reason rituals
ill-omens' (Itas-ngan 'bring) portends that
she will bring obstacles to herself and her
will bring obstacles to herself when the
wedding coincides with a multiple of the
portends that if the wedding takes place under
a hostile trigram, she will be rude-mouthed,
even if she is sixty years of age! Such a bride will
husband when the wedding coincides with
averting such obstacles should be performed, her seventh-removed year sign (bdun-zur),
number nine (dgu-mig) or the tomb-sign
be inauspicious for the husband's home,
coincides with the numeric square governing
her mother's own wedding. However, if the
the trigram governing her mother's own
wedding. However, if rituals are performed
their number corresponding to the age of the
bride at the time of her departure from the
but that good auspices will prevail if rites
averting obstacles to the bdun-zuryear are
devouring demons (za-'dre) in the place
to counteract divorce, the marriage will
(dur-mig), for which reason ritual texts,
such as the rDo-rje sder-mo'i gzungs,
should be recited on such days.
become compatible.
family home.
undertaken.
where the wedding takes place are
controlled, it will be auspicious.
bringing the sufferings of ill-health upon herself
and eventually dying due to a riding accident.
Therefore, the bride should be given away
dressed in men's clothing and the
Ting-'dzin rgyal-po'i gzung should be recited.
The 'bride who carries off wealth and good
The 'bride who wears a sickle on her crown'
The 'bride who carries the wooden slate of
The 'bride who consumes her husband'
luck with an iron hook' (Icags-kyu) portends
(spyi-zor) portends that there will be loud
death' (khram-shing) portends that the good
The inauspicious 'bride who ends the family
line' (rabs-chad) portends that the family
line will end if she sets out under the natal
numeric square of both her parents, and
The 'bride who brings divorce' (bye-bra)
portends that divorce will ensue if she sets
out in the year, month, day or hour of the bird or
monkey, under the trigram Li or Kham and the
that her father and brother's luck will be
marriage paeans followed by noisy
luck of the father and brother will end and
carried off if she departs at a time when
altercations if she sets out at a time when
that her children will be inauspicious if she
log-men bird or monkey. Charms (gto) should
sets out under a natal numeric square
a preceptor will die prematurely if she sets
out at a time when the present year impedes
her own luck aspect. To remedy this, good
luck should be attracted by a sword and the
skye-rabs rgyal-por gdams-pa should
the destiny element of the present year
is impeded by her own, causing bad
reputation to grow. However, if an effigy
of one born in a horse or snake year is
be made and the marriage paean recited loudly.
her luck element impedes the present year.
However, if flour is rubbed on the body while
the marriage paeans are being recited, and
a sickle is attached to the crown of the head,
(khyo-zan) portends that she will be
inauspicious for her husband if she sets out
at the same age as her father when he first
set up home, and coinciding with the natal
trigram of her husband or under the Zon
trigram coinciding with one of the eight
inauspicious fire years (me-brgyad). To
rectify this she should be given away after
smearing yellow earth on seven effigies
of dog, goat or sheep, and placing these
coinciding with Yellow Five. To rectify this,
the sTong-chen rab-'joms should be recited,
and rituals connected with the numeric
squares should be performed.
prosperity will be ensured.
be recited.
placed in the skull of a mouse or pig
and consumed after being pulverised by a
smith, good luck and prosperity will prevail.
on the road.
Plate 7, fig. 21 (Ms l: ff. 31-34): Prognostications concerning the outcome if a bride sets out from the parental home under her own natal trigram
If she sets out under her natal trigram Li,
she should hold an axe in her hand, which
is to be stolen by the groom's younger sister,
If she sets out under her natal trigram Khen
she should hold an empty sack in her hand,
If she sets out under her natal trigram Khon.
she should hold a net in her hand, which is
to be stolen by the groom's younger sister
and placed at a crossroads.
If she sets out under her natal trigram
Dva, she should wear a stag's antler
headdress, which is to be knocked from
her head by the groom's younger sister
If she sets out under her natal trigram Kham,
she should be shackled, the chains being
severed with an axe by the groom's
younger sister.
If she sets out under her natal trigram Gin, she
should carry a sack of earth on her back, which
is to be poured out by the groom's younger sister.
which is to be stolen from her by the
and burnt.
groom's younger sister.
and crushed underfoot.
If she sets out under her natal trigram
Zin, she should hold a sweeping brush
If she sets out under her natal trigram Zon,
she should carry a razor attached to her
nose, which is to be stolen by the groom's
in her hand, which is to be stolen by the
groom's younger sister.
younger sister, and laid face-upwards.
[ ཁམགང
Plate 7, fig. 21
In particular, there are specific injunctions to be followed when a bride sets out under a numeric square identical to her own natal
numeric square, otherwise the so-called “nine bridal gods and demons' (bag-ma'i lha-'dre dgu) will cause their respective havoc. For exam-
ple, if she sets out under the influence of the demon ‘Rocky Ogress' (brag-srin), it portends that half her children will die and half will live,
but if she sets out under the influence of White Lotus' (padma dkar-mo), the family and its wealth will increase.
5. Calculation of the nuptial numeric squares in combination with the bridal spirits ('dom-sbrags)
Nine bridal gods and demons' are naturally associated with different directions: Las-kyi srin-mo with the centre, red Brag-srin dmar-mo
with the east, red gShin-rje dmar-mo with the south, white Padma dkar-mo with the west, black Klu-bsen sbrul-mgo with the north,
brown Āryadevī with the north-east, white Rin-chen 'bar-ma with the south-east, black 'Phung-sri rnga-mo with the south-west, and
white rDo-rje 'bar-ma with the north-west.
However, when the nine numeric squares are directly linked to the ‘nine bridal gods and demons', there are
specific impacts, as illustrated on Plate 8, fig. 11. For example, when White One in the south-east is associated with the god 'Phung-sri
rnga-mo nag, it suggests there will be little merit, ill-health and a short lifespan. When Black Two in the south is associated with the god
Las-srin, it portends that there will be widowhood or divorce. When Blue Three in the south-west is associated with the god Srin 'bar-ma
it portends altercations (kha-mchu shi-chad) and harm inflicted by plague-causing spirits (gnyan), malign goblins (the'u-brang) and king
spirits (rgyal-po). When Green Four in the east is associated with Las-srin it portends many diseases and difficulty in raising children.



218
The White Beryl
ལྷ་གཟའ་
དུག་ཁྱེར་
བྱེ་བྲལ།
When White Six in the west is associated with the god Rin-chen 'bar-ma it portends great wealth, success and good reputation.
However, when Red Seven in the north-east is associated with Rin-chen 'bar-ma one will be subjected to sudden abdominal spasms.
When White Eight in the north is associated with the god Padma dkar-mo, it auspiciously suggests that the attributes of the five senses
will be possessed. When Red Nine in the north-west is associated with the goddess Āryadevī, it portends long life, few diseases and an
abundance of food and wealth. Lastly, when Yellow Five in the centre is associated with the god rDo-rje 'bar-ma, it predicts an average or
moderate outcome for the bride.
When the bride sets out under Blue Three in association with the
bridal spirit Srin 'bar-ma in the SW (the direction naturally associated
with 'Phung-sri rnga-mo), it portends altercations and harm inflicted
Plate 8, fig. 11 (Ms I: f. 35): Calculation of the nuptial numeric squares in combination with the nine bridal spirits ('dom-sbrags)
When the bride sets out under White One in association with the bridal When the bride sets out under Black Two in association with the bridal
spirit black 'Phung-sri rnga-mo in the SE (the direction naturally spirit Las-srin in the S (the direction naturally associated with red
associated with Rin-chen 'bar-ma), it portends that there will be little gShin-rje dmar-mo), it portends that there will be widowhood
merit, ill-health and a short lifespan.
(Iha-gza' dug-khyer or divorce (bye-bra).
When the bride sets out under Green Four in association with the bridal When the bride sets out under Yellow Five in association with the bridal
spirit Las-srin in the E (the direction naturally associated with red
spirit rDo-rje 'bar-ma in the Centre (the direction naturally associated
Brag-srin), it portends many diseases and difficulty in raising children. with Las-kyi srin-mo), it predicts an average or moderate outcome
by plague-causing spirits, malign goblins and king spirits.
When the bride sets out under White Six in association with the bridal
spirit Rin-chen 'bar-ma in the W (the direction naturally associated
with white Padma dkar-mo), it portends great wealth, success and
for the bride.
good reputation.
When the bride sets out under Red Nine in association with the bridal
When the bride sets out under Red Seven in association with the bridal
When the bride sets out under White Eight in association with the bridal
spirit Padma dkar-mo in the N (the direction naturally associated with
spirit Āryadevī in the NW (the direction naturally associated with
spirit Rin-chen 'bar-ma in the NE (the direction naturally associated
with brown Āryadevi), it portends that she will be subjected to sudden
black Klu-bsen sbrul-mgo), it augurs auspiciously
white rDo-rje 'bar-ma), it portends long life, few diseases and an
abdominal spasms, and the sudden appearance of enemies.
that the attributes of the five senses will be possessed.
abundance of food and wealth.
(Blank on illustrated Ms.)
Plate 8, fig. 11
6. Calculation of the nuptial years (lo'i lam-rtsis)
It is deemed inauspicious if a bride is given away in her seventh-removed bdun-zur year, which is one of naturally occurring obstacles, or
in the so-called 'lesser star' year (skar-chung) or one coinciding with a multiple of the number nine (dgu-mig) or a weak tomb-sign (dur-
chung),98 because she may well die prematurely. Also, the bride should not set out on one of the four iron or eight fire log-men years, which
are inauspicious, bringing disaster to the heavenly and earthly gates (gnam-sa'i sgo),99 and portending the end of the family line, or
divorce. If such negative years are chosen, specific rites should be performed to counteract their influence.
It is particularly inauspicious if a bride sets out under her own natal year-sign, as indicated on Plate 8, fig. 10. For
example, if her sign is the mouse, she may die at the age of eighteen or twenty-seven. From the age of fifteen she will not have a son, and
at twenty-six she will provoke unfavourable consequences for her in-laws and parents. If her sign is the ox, she may die at the age of six-
teen or eighteen, and will not give birth to a son from the age of fourteen. If her sign is the tiger, she may die at the age of seventeen or
twenty-two. She will be incapable of giving birth to a son from the age of eleven, and at the age of thirty, twenty-six or thirty-six she will
be inauspicious to her parents-in-law, unable to continue the family line. If her sign is the hare, she may die at the age of twelve or sixteen.
From the age of thirteen she will be incapable of giving birth to a son, and at the age of twenty-nine or thirty she will be inauspicious for
her husband or herself. If her sign is the dragon, she may die at the age of seventeen or nineteen. From the age of eleven she will be inca-
pable of giving birth to a son, and at the age of twenty-two or twenty-eight she will be inauspicious to her parents-in-law and to herself,
unable to continue the family line. If her sign is the snake, she may die at the age of twelve or twenty-four. From the age of twenty, she
will be barren, and at the age of twenty-eight inauspicious to her brother-in-law. If her sign is the horse, she may die at the age of seven-
teen or twenty-nine. From the age of fifteen she will be incapable of giving birth to a son, and at the age of twenty-two she will bring bad
auspices upon herself, being unable to bear a son. If her sign is the sheep, she may die at the age of fourteen or sixteen. From the age of
twelve, she will be incapable of having a son, and at the age of twenty-two or twenty-six or thirty-six she will be subjected to infectious
diseases, bringing bad auspices upon her brother-in-law and herself, while she will have only impoverished daughters. If her sign is the
monkey, she may die at the age of fifteen or twenty-one. From the age of sixteen she will be incapable of having a son, while from the age
of fourteen, twenty-five or twenty-two she may not have a daughter, and she will be subjected to infectious diseases, bringing bad aus-
pices upon her brother-in-law. If her sign is the bird, she may die at the age of fourteen or twenty-two. From the age of seventeen she will
be incapable of having a son, and at the age of twelve or thirteen she will fall ill and be incidentally inauspicious to neighbours. If her sign
is the dog, she may die at the age of seventeen or twenty-one, while from the age of twenty she will be incapable of having a son. If her
sign is the pig, she may die at the age of thirteen or twenty-three. From the age of sixteen she will be bereft of sons, and at the age of four-
teen or thirty-two she will be susceptible to primordial bewitchers (ye-'brog).
Plate : fio 19
20



219
Divinations concerning marriage
Plate 8, fig. 10 (Ms l: ff. 35–36): Inauspicious prognostications concerning brides who leave the parental home under their own year-signs
mouse
OX
Ox
tiger
hare
dragon
snake
horse
sheep
monkey
bird
dog
pig
If the bride's year-sign is the following and she leaves the parental home under
the same sign (bag-ma'i lo)
She may die at the ages of ('chi-ba)
And may not give birth to sons after the age of (bu mi-skye)
18 or 27
15
26 or 18
14
1 7 or 22
11
1240 or 16
13
17 or 19
11
1 2 or 24
20
17 or 29
15 R
14 or 16
14
15 or 21
16
14 or 22
17
17 or 21
20
13 or 23
16
As depicted on Supplementary Plate 17, fig. 12, there are other predictions to determine the age for marriage based on the bride's year-
sign. In the case of those brides who have a natal sign corresponding to one of the four first seasonal months of the year (tiger, snake,
monkey or pig), the outcome will be auspicious if they set out at the age of eighteen, and moderate at the age of twenty-seven. In the case
of those who have a natal sign corresponding to one of the four mid-seasonal months (hare, horse, bird or mouse), the outcome will be
moderate if they set out at the age of twenty-five or thirty-one, and in the case of those who have a natal sign corresponding to one of the
four last seasonal months (dragon, sheep, dog or ox), it will be fine if they set out at the age of twenty-four and average at the age of
fifteen. Various rituals are then prescribed to avert the risk of death during the aforementioned adversarial years, as indicated in White
Beryl, f. 242b.
aas
Oot
alming
20
Plate 17, fig. 12
dain
lankare
Regional
Plate 17, fig. 12 (Ms Il: ff. 6–10): Determining the optimum and average ages for marriage based on the bride's year-sign (White Beryl, f. 242b)
If the bride's year-sign belongs to the following
the optimum age for her departure ('gro-lo bzang) is
categories (bag-lo)
the mediocre age for her departure ('gro-lo 'bring) is
Tiger, monkey, pig or snake
27
Mouse, horse, bird or hare
Ox, sheep, dog or dragon
Brides of varying ages may also have particular flaws (bag-ma'i lo-skyon), as illustrated on Plate 7, fig. 22. For example, at the age of
seventeen the bride (called gdong-mo sna dmar-ma), who is inauspicious for her husband, should come forth with a blackened nose
(zhur-nag 'thon). At the age of eighteen the bride (called nag-mo ral-pa-can), who is inauspicious for the relatives, should wear a white
turban. At the age of nineteen the bride (called keg dme-sha-can), who is inauspicious for herself, should have a gold ornament. At the
age of twenty the bride (called blo-yi kha-gcad-ma), who cannot maintain long friendships, should advantageously wear coral. At the
age of twenty-one the bride (called brub-khung chen-mo), who is inauspicious for herself, should wear a retentive mantra charm of
the Nucleus of Dependent Origination (Āryapratītyasamutpādahțdaya). At the age of twenty-two the bride (called bye-bral kun-gyi me),
who will get divorced once in her life, will keep a long-lasting friendship if she wears the sNang-brgyad charm. At the age of twenty-
three the bride (called khyo-med brang-lag grang), who is harmful to her father, brother and husband, should recite the gDugs-dkar
snang-brgyad. At the age of twenty-four the bride (called nag-nag khyim-med-ma), who is inauspicious for her own relatives, should
wear white felt. At the age of twenty-five the bride (called rnga-zor phyi-mig-ma) should recite the Phyir-'ong 'gro-phyogs mdo five
times. At the age of twenty-six the bride (called Idog-smyo 'dre-can) is harmed by the king spirits and bewitchers (rgyal-'gong), for
which reason she should be reprimanded in various ways. At the age of twenty-seven the bride (called dgu-mig kha-mo-che dngur-
che) should have moxibustion applied to her nose. At the age of twenty-eight the bride (called khyo-la dbang-byed-ma), who exhausts
her husband, should prompt him to run away as soon as she arrives, since misfortune will be encountered! Otherwise, she should wear
an amulet inscribed with the Litany of the Names of Mañjuśrī (Mañjuśrīnāmasangītı). At the age of twenty-nine the bride (called nag-mo
mi-zan-ma), who inauspiciously brings misery to the relatives, should recite the 'Jam-dpal snang-brgyad, and so forth. At the age of
thirty the bride (called babs-thang chad-ma), who will return to her father's home, should make a libation. At the age of thirty-one
the bride (called nag-mo nor-zan-ma), who brings loss or calamity, should make offerings to a deity or to a wealth divinity in order
to amass good luck. Lastly, at the age of thirty-two the bride (called bag-ma'i dbang-thang zad), who will have a bad reputation, should
have her reputation guarded on the way. There is no doubt that if these auspicious coincidences are ensured as recommended here,
all flaws will be eliminated.



220
The White Beryl
Plate 17, fig. 22
SA
ཉེར་གཅིག ཉེར་གཉིས།
ཉེ་
གསཾ ཉེར་བཞི།
སུམ་
SV
Plate 7, fig. 22 (Ms l: ff. 31-34): Prognostications concerning the potential defects of brides who leave the parental home at certain ages, and the appropriate ritual remedies
The bride who sets out at the age of seventeen,
The bride who sets out at the age of eighteen, called
The bride who sets out at the age of nineteen, called
The bride who sets out at the age of twenty, called blo-yi
keg dme-sha-can, is inauspicious for herself, for
called gdong-mo sna dmar-ma, is inauspicious
for her husband, for which reason she should
nag-mo ral-pa-can, is inauspicious for the relatives,
for which reason she should wear a white turban.
kha-gcad-ma, cannot maintain long friendships, for
which reason she should advantageously wear a horn
which reason she should have a gold ornament.
come forth with a blackened nose.
on her hat.
The bride who sets out at the age of twenty-one,
The bride who sets out at the age of twenty-three,
The bride who sets out at the age of twenty-four,
called brub-khung chen-mo, is inauspicious for
called khyo-med brang-lag gyang, is harmful to her
called nag-nag khyim-med-ma, is inauspicious for
The bride who sets out at the age of twenty-two,
called bye-bral kun-gyi me, will get divorced once in
her life, but should keep a long-lasting friendship if
she wears the sNang-brgyad charm.
The bride who sets out at the age of twenty-five,
called rnga-zor phyi-mig-ma, should recite the
Phyir-'ong 'gro-phyogs mdo five times.
The bride who sets out at the age of twenty-six, called
Idog-smyo 'dre-can, is harmed by the king spirits and
bewitchers, for which reason she should be reprimanded
herself, for which reason she should wear a retentive
father, brother and husband, for which reason she
should recite the gDugs-dkar snang-brgyad.
her own relatives, for which reason she should wear
white felt.
charm of the Nucleus of Dependent Origination
in various ways.
(rTen-'brel snying-po).
The bride who sets out at the age of twenty-seven,
The bride who sets out at the age of twenty-eight.
The bride who sets out at the age of twenty-nine,
The bride who sets out at the age of thirty, called
The bride who sets out at the age of thirty-one,
called dgu-mig kha-mo-che dngur-che, should have
called khyo-la dbang-byed-ma, exhausts her
babs-thang chad-ma, will return to her father's home,
for which reason she should make a libation.
called nag-mo mi-zan-ma, inauspiciously brings
misery to the relatives, for which reason she should
recite the 'Jam-dpal snang-brgyad, and so forth.
moxibustion applied to her nose.
The bride who sets out at the age of thirty-two, called
bag-ma'i dbang-thang zad, will have a bad reputation,
for which reason she should have her reputation
husband, for which reason she should wear a charm
of the Litany of the Names of Mañjuśrī
called nag-mo nor-zan-ma, brings loss or calamity,
for which reason she should make offerings to
a deity or to a wealth divinity in order to amass
guarded on the way.
('Jam-dpal mtshan-brjod).
good luck
7. Calculations of the nuptial months for giving away a bride (zla-ba'i rdzong-lugs)
The following calculations, illustrated on Plate 8, fig. 12, determine the auspicious and inauspicious months for a bride to leave the
parental home. The first series, in which the departure month corresponds exactly to the groom's year-sign (given first) or the bride's
year-sign (given second), portends the risk of premature death to the bride. For example, a departure in a month corresponding exactly
to a groom of the tiger sign or a bride of the monkey sign may carry the risk of premature death for the bride, as will one coinciding
exactly with the hare or bird, the dragon or dog, the snake or pig, the horse or mouse, and the sheep or ox.
The second series, indicating a departure month once removed from the identical sign, portends the auspicious
departure months, as when the bride sets out in a hare or bird month when the groom's sign is the tiger and her own is the monkey; in a
tiger or monkey month when the groom's sign is the hare and her own is the bird; in a snake or pig month when the groom's sign is the
dragon and her own is the dog; in a dragon or dog month when the groom's sign is the snake and her own is the pig; in a sheep or ox
month when the groom's sign is the horse and her own is the mouse; and in a horse or mouse month when the groom's sign is the sheep
and her own is the ox.
The third series, indicating a departure month twice removed from the identical sign, portends danger and bad
luck for the children born of such a marriage, as when the bride sets out in a dragon or dog month when the groom's sign is the tiger and
her own is the monkey; in a ox or sheep month when the groom's sign is the hare and her own is the bird; in a horse or mouse month when
the groom's sign is the dragon and her own is the dog; in a hare or bird month when the groom's sign is the snake and her own is the pig;
in a tiger or monkey month when the groom's sign is the horse and her own is the mouse; and in a snake or pig month when the groom's
sign is the sheep and her own is the ox.
The fourth series, indicating a departure month thrice removed from the identical sign, portends that the bride's
parents-in-law may die prematurely. This may occur when she sets out in a snake or pig month when the groom's sign is the tiger and her
own is the monkey; in a horse or mouse month when the groom's sign is the hare and her own is the bird; in a sheep or ox month when the
groom's sign is the dragon and her own is the dog; in a tiger or monkey month when the groom's sign is the snake and her own is the pig;
in a hare or bird month when the groom's sign is the horse and her own is the mouse; and in a dragon or dog month when the groom's
sign is the sheep and her own is the ox.
The fifth series, indicating a departure month four times removed from the identical sign, portends that it will be
inauspicious for the bride's parents. This occurs, for example, if she sets out in a horse or mouse month when the groom's sign is the tiger
COA.



221
Divinations concerning marriage
and her own is the monkey; in a snake or pig month when the groom's sign is the hare and her own is the bird; in a tiger or monkey month
when the groom's sign is the dragon and her own is the dog; in a sheep or ox month when the groom's sign is the snake and her own is the
pig; in a dragon or dog month when the groom's sign is the horse and her own is the mouse; and in a hare or bird month when the groom's
sign is the sheep and her own is the ox.
Lastly, the sixth series, indicating a departure month five times removed from the identical sign, portends that
the husband may die prematurely, his lifespan exhausted. This may occur, for example, if the bride sets out in a sheep or ox month when
the groom's sign is the tiger and her own is the monkey; in a dragon or dog month when the groom's sign is the hare and her own is the
bird; in a hare or bird month when the groom's sign is the dragon and her own is the dog; in a horse or mouse month when the groom's
sign is the snake and her own is the pig; in a snake or pig month when the groom's sign is the horse and her own is the mouse; and in a
tiger or monkey month when the groom's sign is the sheep and her own is the ox.
The obstacles pertaining to weddings that have to be conducted during one of these inauspicious months of the
year may be counteracted by the performance of specific rituals, as indicated in White Beryl, f. 243 a/b. For example, to counteract the first
series, the bride should be given away outwardly wearing a man's costume, and parched barley should be poured into her gruel and then
thrown out backwards when the bridal procession reaches the half-way point on the road; and to counteract the fifth series the bride
should be given away from a house other than that of her parents.
Plate 8, fig. 12
རང་རང་ཟླ་གར
AAWAS
བ[ཞས་པ་དང་
ཞབཀ་ཤིས་པ།
གསུམ་པ་ན་བུ་
གཉན་ས་དྲན།།
བཞི་པ་བགམ3
ajg 3910
ལྔ་པ་ཕྱི་མ་དག་
ལ་ངནU
CCC
hare or bird month
dragon or dog month
snake or pig month
horse or mouse month
sheep or ox month
tiger or monkey month
snake or pig month
dragon or dog month
sheep or ox month
horse or mouse month
ox or sheep month
horse or mouse month
hare or bird month
monkey or tiger month
snake or pig month
Plate 8, fig. 12 (Ms I: ff. 35–36): Prognostications concerning the nuptial months for giving away a bride (zla-ba'i rdzong-lugs)
Firstly, premature death is predicted for the bride who sets out in the identical month of her tiger or monkey month
husband's year-sign (given first) or her own year-sign (given second)
(rang-rang zla-bar bag-ma'chi)
Secondly, good auspices are predicted for the bride who sets out in the month once removed hare or bird month
from the identical sign of her husband (given first) or herself (given second)
(gnyis-pa bzang-zhing bkra-shis-pa)
Thirdly, danger and bad luck for the children are predicted for the bride who sets out in the dragon or dog month
month twice removed from the identical sign of her husband (given first) or herself
(given second) (gsum-pa thon-bu gnyen-la ngan)
Fourthly, premature death is predicted for the parents-in-law of the bride who sets out in the snake or pig month
month thrice removed from the identical sign of her husband (given first) or herself
(given second) (bzhi-pa bag-ma'i gyod-rgyug 'chi)
Fifthly, inauspices are predicted for the parents of the bride who sets out in the month four mouse or horse month
places removed from the identical sign of her husband (given first) or herself (given second)
(Inga-pa pha-ma ngag-la ngan)
Sixthly, premature death may be predicted for the husband of the bride who sets out in the sheep or ox month
month five places removed from the identical sign of her husband (given first) or herself
(given second) (drug-pa khyo-dang tshe-la ngan)
mouse or horse month
sheep or ox month
tiger or monkey month
bird or hare month
dragon or dog month
pig or snake month
monkey or tiger month
ox or sheep month
dog or dragon month
hare or bird month
dog or dragon month
bird or hare month
mouse or horse month
pig or snake month
tiger or monkey month



222
The White Beryl
8. Calculation of the nuptial days (tshe-nyi'i lam-rtsis)
One should know that the first calendar day of the month is one on which the vitality aspects of the bride's father and brother are
focused. The third and fourth are inauspicious for her mother. The fifth and sixth are dangerous for the lifespan of her younger
brother. The eighth and ninth are associated with the vitality of riding horses, the eighteenth and nineteenth with fears and anxieties
(bred-dngangs), the twenty-first and twenty-second suggest that she will be unable to maintain the home, the twenty-eighth suggests
that she will bring ill-repute to her parents and parents-in-law, the thirtieth portends death, and the third of the seventh month is the
bride’s ‘heavenly gate' (gnam-sgo).
Above all, one should avoid the twenty-seventh day of the four first seasonal months, the seventeenth of the four
mid-seasonal months, and the seventh of the four last seasonal months. Also, the bride may die prematurely if her wedding coincides with
her birthday, and her lifespan may be exhausted prematurely if it coincides with her seventh-removed day (bdun-zur).
9. Calculation of the nuptial planets or weekdays (gza'i lam-rtsis)
It is said that a bride may die prematurely if she is given away on a Saturday. On a Wednesday Rahu will act as the 'black celestial dog’
of the planets. Monday is an average day for weddings, while Friday and Thursday are generally auspicious. In the case of wedding
ceremonies coinciding with a Sunday or Tuesday or with a hostile planetary aspect or a birthday, ritual means should be employed
to pacify negativity.
10. Calculation of the nuptial constellations (skar-ma'i lam-rtsis)
It will be inauspicious if the bride sets out from the parental home under the ascendant constellations Křttikā (smin-drug), Anurādhā (lha-
mtshams), Revati (nam-gru), Dhanasta (mon-dre) or Maghā (mchu). However, it will be auspicious if a bride with a wood destiny element
sets out under Pusyā (rgyal-smad), or if one with a fire element sets out under Uttaraphalgunī (dbo) or Svāti (sa-rı), or if one with an earth
element sets out under Viśākhā (sa-ga) or Śravanā (bya-gzhug), or if one with an iron element sets out under Viśākhā (sa-ga), Pūrvāasādhā
(bre) or Uttarāsādhā (chu-smad), or indeed if one with a water element sets out under Pūrvabhadrapada (khrums-stod) or
Uttarabhadrapada (khrums-smad). If the constellation is an inauspicious one, it is important that the planetary good-luck charm (gto)
known as gza'-sgar gto-chog is made, the sNang-brgyad recited, a water libation performed, and so forth. More detailed admonitions are
given in texts such as the Tantra of the Wheel of Time (Kālacakratantra) and the Svarodaya Tantra.
11. Calculation of the nuptial spirit lords of the soil (sa-bdag lam-rtsis)
Inauspicious days may portend widowhood since the spirit lords of the soil, including Ki-kang, Pi-ling, Zin-phung and Tshe-gnyan, are
malignant and harsh, and one might mistake their positions.41 Special thread-cross rites and charms (gto) should be made, and the sNang-
brgyad should be recited many times to counteract their influence.
12. Calculation of the nuptial hour (dus-tshod-kyi lam-rtsis)
Just as one should avoid a wedding day when plague-causing spirits (gnyan) are active, so one should avoid a wedding hour when the
spirit lords of the soil are in motion. Auspicious hours are indicated by the conjunction of the mother- or friend-relationships formed by
the elements and the years, such as the mouse hour in relation to a wood element year and the monkey hour in relation to a water element
year. Thus, for example, brides with a water destiny element should be given away in the hour of the bird or monkey. Seventh-removed
aspects (bdun-zur) and the four adversarial signs should also be avoided.
The last ten calculations have been summarised by Lo-chen Dharmaśrī under the heading "Ten Factors
Governing the Time for Giving Away the Bride', which he enumerates as follows (Moonbeams, f. 27b):
Secondly, the bride is given away [at a time determined]
By the ten [factors governing this time):
Years, numeric squares, trigrams, sectors of growth and decline, 42
Months, days, hours, planets, constellations and spirit lords of the soil.
The remaining calculations taken into account when determining the time for giving away a bride are as follows:
13. Calculation of the direction of the nuptial chart (phyogs)
If the bride is given away in the direction indicated by the chart of heavenly medicine (gnam-sman), it suggests that all wishes will be
fulfilled. The direction indicated by the chart of ‘sustaining vitality' (srog-'tsho) suggests long life, while that indicated by the chart of
‘growth through glory' (dpal-bskyed) suggests that the couple’s children will prosper. The direction indicated by the chart of “intimation
of luck' (phyva-lon) is auspicious, while those of the ‘five demons' ('dre-lnga) and the cutting influence of demons' (bdud-gcod) respectively
indicate evil spirits and death. Lastly, the direction indicated by the chart of'corporal punishment (lus chad-pa) suggests the ending of the
family line, while that of 'harm' (gnod-pa) portends an inability to raise children. Otherwise various precautions should be made to secure
an auspicious conjunction, especially when the direction of the cutting influence of demons' coincides with one or other of the eight tri-
grams, or to avoid the spirit lords of the soil, as outlined in White Beryl, ff. 2446–245a.
14. The special calculation of the black celestial dog' spirit (gnam-khyi'i sgos-rtsis)
There are particular calculations to be made concerning the direction of the so-called black celestial dog'spirit*Sat the time of a wedding.
This has seven aspects, comprising: the eighteen 'black celestial dog' spirits of the year; the ‘black celestial dog' spirit coinciding with the
last autumnal month; the black celestial dog' spirits coinciding with the tiger, horse and dog days and inauspicious days; the black celes-
tial dog' spirit coinciding with the twilight hour; the 'black celestial dog' spirit coinciding with the trigram Zon; the black celestial dog’



223
Divinations concerning marriage
spirit coinciding with the planets Mercury and Rahu; and the 'black celestial dog' spirit coinciding with the spirit lord Hal-khyi. There
are different techniques for calculating the positions of these spirits at a given time, according to the ancient and new traditions of
Chinese divination, with the head and the face of the spirit rotating according to the seasons of the year, the days of the month and the
hours of the day. Various ritual practices are prescribed if the territory of the spirit lords is infringed.
15. The five essential persons (dgos-pa'i mi-rigs Inga)
The description of the officiants of the wedding ceremony, which is given in White Beryl (f. 246a/b), is summarised conveniently by
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī as follows (Moonbeams, f. 27b):
Thirdly, there are the five essential persons:
A best-man born under one of the three compatible year-signs**
And with a compatible body element;
A horseman whose vitality element is in a mother-relationship; *5
A bridesmaid of compatible vitality element; 46
A waitress whose vitality element is in a friend-relationship,
Or whose destiny element is in a mother-relationship;
And [an attendant] with a year-sign in a seventh-removed enemy-relationship, ***
Who should perform the various sundry duties.
16. The nuptial transport (sna-len)
As illustrated on Plate 8, fig. 13, brides who set out under the Li trigram should ride a horse. Those who set out under the Khon tri-
gram should ride a sheep. Those who set out under the Dva trigram should ride a goat. Those who set out under the Khon trigram
should ride a dog. Those who set out under the Kham trigram should ride a pig. Those who set out under the Gin trigram should ride
an ox. Those who set out under the Zin trigram should ride a donkey; and lastly those who set out under the Zon trigram should ride
a hybrid yak. The husband should then hold the waistband of the bride's dress and escort her in this manner. If the bride is given
away under the trigram Li, the horse should additionally be covered by the groom's dress and he should hold the waistband and
escort the bride in the previous manner.
Plate 8, fig. 13
Plate 8, fig. 13 (Ms I: ff. 35–36): The nuptial transport (sna-len)
Brides who set out under Li
Brides who set out under Khon
Brides who set out under Dva
Brides who set out under Khen
Brides who set out under Kham
Brides who set out under Gin
Brides who set out under Zin
Brides who set out under Zon
should ride a horse
should ride a sheep
should ride a goat
should ride a dog
should ride a pig
should ride an ox
should ride a donkey
should ride a hybrid yak
17. The nuptial seat (bzhag-sa)
If the bride's seat is beside a pillar, it portends that there will be shuddering cracks. If her seat faces the door, the kitchen gods will be
disturbed. If its back is to the door, the horses and yaks will bolt. If it has no canopy, it will be seized by the ‘celestial dog' spirit. It will
be auspicious if a woven carpet is placed on the seat, inscribed with the crossed-vajra emblem or other auspicious motifs. Specifically,
in the case of a bride whose vitality element is inauspicious, she should dress in white and a crossed-vajra should be inscribed. In the
case of a bride whose body element is inauspicious, an eight-spoked wheel should be inscribed. In the case of a bride whose destiny
element is inauspicious, a svāstika should be inscribed; and in the case of a bride whose luck element is inauspicious, an eight-petalled
lotus should be inscribed. An arrow with vulture quills and five-coloured silks and an ornamental mirror should be placed in the
bride's right hand.
Remedial methods determined through the hidden chart of the offspring of heaven and earth, utilising the twelve year-signs (thabs rim-gro sna-sel chog-bcas)
Various rites are to be performed in the course of the marriage ceremony, taking into account the trigrams, numeric squares and cycle of
years. These include the recitation of Buddhist scriptures, such as the Litany of the Names of Mañjuśrī (Mañjuśrīnāmasangīti), and retentive
charms pertaining to the marriage ceremony, such as the sNang-ba brgyad, and the making of amulets, thread-crosses and charms (gto).
These are all enumerated in White Beryl, ff. 2466–247a. In conclusion, as Lo-chen Dharmaśrī says (Moonbeams, f. 27b):
[These techniques) should be determined,
After inspecting extensively and in detail
The Rin-chen 'gro-lam, Chapter Five of the Commentary, and other texts. 49



VI
Divinations of obstacle years



226
The White Beryl
Opposite Detail of Plate 9, fig. 13 (see p. 254), showing the
multiples of nine at ages forty-five and fifty-seven
All degrees of happiness and sorrow may be analysed in accordance with the five elements. The divination of obstacle years (keg-rtsis),
which is of immediate benefit to all sorts of people, utilises such techniques to determine the degrees of happiness or suffering that will be
experienced in the course of a given year within the sexagenary cycle. This branch of divination comprises the so-called outer (phyi),
inner (nang) and intermediate (bar) calculations, which are respectively made on the basis of the years, the trigrams and the numeric
squares, along with the secret (gsang) calculation of the sectors of growth and decline, the most secret (yang-gsang) calculation of the
hours coinciding with the destiny element, the calculation of the multiples of nine (dgu-mig) and the tomb-sign calculation (dur-mig).
Deployment of the divinatory pebbles
Altogether, forty-seven pebbles are employed.' Exemplary schematic charts are included below. These comprise: six basic unchanging
pebbles (mi-'gyur rtsa-ba'i rde'u drug), twenty-four pebbles of conclusive analysis (gcod='bral rde'u nyer-bzhi), four pebbles indicative of the
predicted results (kha-dmar rde'u bzhi), seven 'harsh' pebbles (rtsub-rdel bdun), four pebbles representing obstacles associated with the
numeric squares (sme-keg rde'u bzhi), and two more representing respectively the multiple of the number nine and the tomb-sign calcula-
tions (dgu-dur mig-gnyis-kyi rde'u). Accordingly, in his introduction to this chapter, Lo-chen Dharmaśrī says (Moonbeams, ff. 275–28a):
In the divination of obstacles associated with the course of a given year,
There are altogether forty-seven pebbles (which are employed).
These comprise: six basic unchanging pebbles,
Twenty-four pebbles of conclusive analysis,
Four predictive pebbles, seven 'harsh' pebbles,
Four pebbles concerning minor obstacles associated with the numeric squares,
And two representing the multiple of nine and the tomb-sign.
Six basic unchanging pebbles (White Beryl, f. 248b)
The six basic unchanging pebbles (mi-'gyur rtsa-ba'i rde'u drug) are those representing the calculation of obstacles based on the present
year, the log-men year, the trigrams, the numeric squares, the sectors of growth and decline, and the time at which the divination takes
place. As stated by Lo-chen Dharmaśrī (Moonbeams, f. 28a):
The six [basic unchanging] pebbles comprise:
Two outers (pebbles) representing the sectors
of the present year and the subject's log-men year,
One intermediate (pebble) representing the (subject's] numeric square,
One inner (pebble) representing the (subject's] trigram,
One secret (pebble) representing the years coinciding
with (the subject's] sectors of growth and decline,
And one most secret (pebble) representing the hour coinciding
with (the subject's] destiny element. 4
White pebbles are cast in the case of males,
And black ones in the case of females.
According to other sources, the obstacle years may be calculated according to an outer cycle (phyi-skor) corresponding to the coincidence
of the subject's elements with the present year, an inner cycle (nang-skor) corresponding to the coincidence of the subject's elements with
the log-men year, and a secret cycle (gsang-skor) corresponding to the coincidence of the subject's elements with the year in an enemy-
relationship to the vitality element, which then determines the enemy aspect of the destiny element, the friend aspect of the body element,
the son aspect of the destiny element, the friend aspect of the luck element, and the mother aspect of the vitality element.
Twenty-four pebbles of conclusive analysis (White Beryl, ff. 2486–249a)
These are established by determining the contrasting relationships formed between the subject's six basic unchanging pebbles and the
subject’s vitality, body, destiny and luck elements. Three white pebbles or noughts are placed to represent mother-relationships, two
white pebbles or noughts to represent friend-relationships, one black pebble or cross and one white pebble or nought to represent son-
relationships, two black pebbles or crosses to represent enemy-relationships, one white pebble or nought to represent an identity-rela-
tionship of earth or water, and one black pebble or cross to represent an identity-relationship of wood, iron or fire. In Moonbeams
(f. 28a/b), these twenty-four pebbles and the method of placing them are described as follows:
Thereafter, the pebbles of conclusive analysis (are cast] as follows:
And the [six] basic [unchanging] pebbles,
There are four pebbles representing the contrast
Also taking into account the sectors of growth and decline
Between the subject's vitality element
in relation to the present year.
And the vitality elements of the present year and the log-men year,
[Thus), six pebbles are cast for each of the four elemental aspects:
[Vitality], body, destiny and luck.
And one black pebble in the case of an identity-relationship of wood, iron or fire.
As for the [twelve] sectors of growth and decline,
The six auspicious sectors (of growth] are arranged according to
A hierarchy of superior, mediocre and inferior sectors,
Which are respectively represented by three white pebbles,
Two white pebbles, and one white pebble,
While the six negative sectors (of decline] are also arranged
As well as its trigram and numeric square.
A fifth pebble [is added] by calculating the positive and negative attributes
Of the sectors of growth and decline in relation to the present year,
As for the method of deploying pebbles in these (calculations],
Three white pebbles are placed when a mother-relationship is encountered,
According to superior, mediocre and inferior sectors,
And a sixth by (calculating] the contrast between the hour [of the divination]
And the [subject's] vitality element.
Two when a friend-relationship [is encountered],
Which are then represented respectively by one black and one white pebble
One black pebble, and two black pebbles.
These are the six pebbles representing the vitality aspect.
One white pebble when an identity-relationship of earth or water is encountered,
In this way, calculations are made representing the contrast between
One white and one black pebble when a son-relationship is encountered,
[The subject's] four elemental aspects, including those of body, destiny and luck,
Two black pebbles when an enemy-relationship ſis encountered),



::::
M
88
2
(G
DOS



228
The White Beryl
Four predictive pebbles (White Beryl, ff. 249a-254a)
Once these pebbles of conclusive analysis have been tallied, four pebbles representing predicted results are then placed alongside
whichever pile is the larger (auspicious or inauspicious), one for each of the four vitality, body, destiny and luck calculations.
Chart 6.2 exemplifies this basic system of the divination of obstacles, and shows how the six unchanging pebbles,
the twenty-four pebbles of conclusive analysis and the four predictive pebbles are all arrayed, in the case of a subject born in the fire
dragon year for whom a reading is made in the earth tiger year.
6.2 Exemplary chart
Subject of fire dragon year
six basic pebbles
present year (gnam-lo)
log-men year
current trigram
current numeric square
sectors of growth and
hour of divination
predictive pebbles
(kha-dmar rde')
= earth tiger
= iron mouse
(babs-span) = Zin
(babs-sme) = Red 7
(rtsi-dus)
= water snake
wood=XX
water =00
vitality = earth
body = earth
earth = 0
decline in relation to
present year (dar-
gud gnam-lo)
ill-health = X
ill-health =X
birth = 0
work = 000
wood =XX
wood =XX
wood = 0
earth = 0
fire = 0°C
fire = 0%
fire = X
fire = 0x
fire = 0°C
water =00
water =XX
water = 0 0
destiny = fire
earth = 0X
iron = 00
luck = wood
iron=XX
wood=X
wood=X
The readings or predictions that ensue are diverse. For example, if there are three white vitality pebbles, it is predicted that the elemental
tree of life will grow, a golden bridge of precious gems will be erected, one's back will be warmed by excellent paternal relatives, the sun
of glory will shine before one, and so forth. If there are two white vitality pebbles, the vitality element is in a friend-relationship, predict-
ing that there will be enough food to eat, one's wishes will be fulfilled, the good fortune of having all necessities will increase, one will be
welcomed by auspicious hostile deities (dgra-lha) and there will be no obstacles to one's life during that year. If there is one white vitality
pebble, there will be no obstacles to long life. If there are two black vitality pebbles, it is predicted that one will incur royal punishment
within the year, a minister's army will be mustered within the month, the tree of precious vitality will be broken, the golden bridge will
crumble, and so forth. If there is one black vitality pebble, the sap of the tree of life will dry out, ritual charms (gto) will be ineffective, and
so forth. If there is one white and one black vitality pebble, it is predicted that both auspicious and inauspicious factors will be present, for
which reason misfortunes can be averted by ritual means. Similar predictions are made in respect of the diverse combinations of pebbles
representing the relationships of the body, destiny and luck elements.
Then, if the pebbles representing all four elemental aspects are white it is predicted that the lifelong companion
gods ('go-lha) will be displeased, kitchen pots will boil over, and various other sorts of pollution will occur. Equally, if all these pebbles are
black, it is predicted that heaven and earth will be rent apart, mountains will crumble, oceans will dry, and so forth.
Also, it is said in general that if the pebbles representing the vitality element are white, the sap of the tree of life
will not dry out and there will be no obstacles to long life. If the pebbles representing the body element are white, the tree of physical
growth will not fall down, no sudden diseases will occur, and so forth. If the pebbles representing the destiny element are white, one will
have an abundance of food and clothing and an enriching lifestyle. If the pebbles representing the luck element are white, the subject will
not be dragged down by the weight of his or her luck aspect, merit will increase, and there will be no hostile rumours or bad reputation.
However, if all four sorts of pebble are white the subject will go beyond the bounds of happiness, enduring mishaps in old age or misfor-
tunes in youth. The converse is predicted in the case of black pebbles, except in cases when all four sorts are black. The latter is the direst
of all outcomes, admonishing the subject to receive long-life empowerments (tshe-dbang), to change his or her name, and make offerings
wholeheartedly, without differentiating between the donor, gift and recipient. Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises this topic briefly in the
following verse (Moonbeams, f. 28b):
After tallying the white and black pebbles (of conclusive analysis),
The four pebbles representing the predicted results
Should be placed upon the distinct piles) of three white pebbles,
Two white pebbles, and so forth.
Outer divination of obstacle years based
on the year-signs (White Beryl, ff. 253–256a)
When predictions of obstacle years are made on the basis of the twelve animal signs, the technique comprises the divination based on the
log-men signs, and the calculation of the seven so-called 'harsh' pebbles.
As stated above, the log-men is calculated in different ways for male and female subjects: in the case of males by
counting forwards from the tiger year-sign and by commencing with the element in a son-relationship to the destiny element; and in the
case of females by counting backwards from the monkey year-sign and by commencing with the element in a mother-relationship with
the destiny element.
Thus, for male subjects, the log-men dog is the ‘heavenly gate' (gnam-sgo) and log-men pig is the earthly gate' (sa-
sgo), while for females, the log-men dragon is the 'heavenly gate', and log-men snake is the ‘earthly gate'. Also, the log-men ox and sheep are
known as the harbingers of the ‘five calamities”,6 the log-men bird and monkey as the harbingers of the “five separations'," the log-men
mouse and horse as the harbingers of the ‘five lineage interruptions',* and the log-men tiger and hare as the harbingers of the auspicious
'five acquisitions'.
Other aspects are also calculated, such as the so-called 'heavenly lifeline', 'earthly peg', 'heavenly extension' and
‘earthly extension' aspects,° through which the vitality, body, destiny and luck aspects of the log-men year are respectively secured. The
first of these is counted five places backwards from the log-men, the second five places forwards, the third eight places backwards, and the
fourth eight places forwards. If these form mother-or son-relationships with the subject's luck element it will be auspicious, but if they



229
Divinations of obstacle years
form an enemy-or adversarial relationship, it will be inauspicious. When a pebble alights on the sector of the heavenly gate’ - i.e. the dog
in the case of males and the dragon in the case of females – there is the risk of deluge, and good-luck charms (gto) should be made to secure
the 'heavenly gate', one should avoid thunderbolts, shun the taking of oaths, and so forth. If a pebble alights on the sector of the ‘earthly
gate', one should avoid digging foundations, there will be contagious skin diseases due to miasma, and one should recite the Retentive
Mantra of Kșitigarbha (Kșitigarbhāstottaraśatakanāmadhāraṇī) and Tog-gzungs, while three unrelated persons should recite the Retentive
Mantra of Mahāmāyūrī(Mahāmāyārīdhāraṇī).
Furthermore, if a pebble alights on the one of the five separations', there is the risk of divorce. Various counter-
acting rites should be performed, and the water-mill should be left open for three days, while long-life empowerments are received. If a
pebble alights on one of the five calamities', there will be losses and one should take care in business affairs, and avoid thieves or brigands,
performing rites of aversion and making thread-crosses or zor missiles to subdue hostile forces. If a pebble alights on one of the ‘five line-
age-interruptions', the paternal relatives will be subjected to misfortunes, brigands, disputations and false accusations. Such activities
should be abandoned and one should recite for example the rDo-rje sder-mo gtsug-gtor. Conversely, if a pebble alights on one of the five
acquisitions', the prediction is auspicious, bringing forth divine attributes and wealth.
If the 'heavenly lifeline'is severed, one should perform the nam-mkha' dgu-'phar rite and make the nam-mkha' 'then
thread-cross. If the ‘earthly peg' is neglected, votive stūpas equalling the subject's age in number should be made, and thread-crosses
should be made on behalf of the serpentine spirits and haunting spirits (btsan). If a pebble alights on the 'heavenly extension' or 'earthly
extension' aspect, one should perform the rites which pursue the male gods (pho-lha)." Other inauspicious aspects occur when the log-
men coincides with one or other of the categories of inauspicious years. 12
Furthermore, as stated above,18 matters concerning paternal relatives are calculated according to the wood ele-
ment, those concerning children and descendants in accordance with the fire element, those concerning maternal relatives and land in
accordance with the earth element, those concerning wealth, friends, deities and protectors in accordance with the iron element, and
those concerning in-laws in accordance with the water element.
Model chart 6.3 indicates the strength of these log-men aspects in the case of a subject of the fire dragon year con-
fronting obstacles in the earth tiger year.
fire snake v. iron
6.3 Exemplary chart
Supplementary log-men calculations (log-men le-lag)
'heavenly lifeline' (gnam-gyi 'ju-thag yar-Inga grangs-pa)
‘earthly peg' (sa'i rten-phur mar-Inga grangs-pa)
'heavenly extension' (gnam-gyi rgyang yar-brgyad grangs-pa)
‘earthly extension' (sa'i rgyang mar-brgyad grangs-pa)
'cutting influence of demons' (bdud-gcod)
'roaming of the life-spirit' (bla-khyams)
wood dragon v. fire
water snake v. water
fire sheep v. fire
In Moonbeams (f. 29a/b), Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises this topic as follows:
Moreover, there are four pebbles representing the contrast
Between the subject's four vitality, body, destiny and luck elements
And the four aspects of the supplementary log-men calculation,
Known as the 'heavenly lifeline', the 'earthly peg',
The 'heavenly extension' and the 'earthly extension',
And (thereby] one should calculate aspects such as
The 'cutting influence of demons',
The 'roaming of the life-spirit', 15 and so forth.
The calculation of the seven 'harsh' pebbles (White Beryl, ff. 254a-256a)
In general, the precious human body is afflicted by seven harsh factors (rtsub-pa bdun). These comprise: the harshness of natural obstacles
(rang-keg rtsub), occurring when one's own year-sign coincides with the present year; the harshness of hostile adversarial circumstances
(dgra-gshed rtsub), occurring when one's own year-sign coincides with a seventh-removed aspect (bdun-zur); the harshness of neighbour-
ing signs (khyim-mtshes rtsub), occurring when one's year-sign shares the same destiny element as the present year; the harshness of the
three compatible signs (thun-gsum rtsub), occurring when an identical luck element is shared with that of the present year; the harshness
of obstacles to the ancestral tombs (sri-ngan pha-mes dur-keg rtsub), occurring when the trigram, numeric square, outer planetary aspect
and year-sign all coincide with the presence of the demons of the ancestral tombs; the harshness of spouses (bza'-shug rtsub), occurring
when spouses share an identical trigram; and the harshness of stealthy secret obstacles (gsang-keg rkun-po rtsub), occurring when one's
current trigram (babs-spar) coincides with one's natal trigram (skyes-spar).
Now, the harshness of natural obstacles (rang-keg rtsub) is said to occur when one's own year-sign coincides with
the present year. In such circumstances, one should strive to perform virtuous actions, drawing in prosperity and long life by ritual means,
and making the appropriate recitations, while avoiding contact with those in grief, or invalids and the like. In particular, in one's thir-
teenth month, one will not survive a complex of thirteen diseases. When one's thirteenth year dawns in a son-relationship, hostile forces
may afflict one's health and wealth, for which reason the body and destiny elements are important, requiring the recitation of the sNang-
brgyad and the Five Great Mantras of Retention (Pañcaraksā). It is said that one will not survive a complex of twenty-five diseases. When
one's twenty-fifth year dawns in a friend-relationship, there will be obstacles causing irregular breathing, and hostile forces will arise to
bring malaise, calamity and misfortune, for which reason the vitality element is emphasised in the case of males and the destiny element in
the case of females. This requires the recitation of the Vajravidāraṇa, the Sūtra of Amitāyus, and so forth. When one's thirty-seventh year



2
38
ME
TE
5
at
SS
2
SA
e
)
3
es
22
ETA



231
Divinations of obstacle years
Opposite Detail of Plate 9, fig. 13 (see p. 254), showing the multiples
of nine at ages twenty-one and thirty-three
dawns in an enemy-relationship, one is exposed to the ‘cutting influence of demons', damaging one's health, for which reason the destiny
element is important. One should recite texts such as the Sher-phyin togs-gzungs, and it is said one will not survive a complex of thirty-
seven diseases. When one's forty-ninth year dawns in a mother-relationship, there will be obstacles to one's reputation, for which reason
the luck element is emphasised, and it is said one will not survive a complex of sixty-one diseases. When one's sixty-first year dawns in an
identity-relationship, the obstacle of divorce will arise, bringing great sufferings, for which reason the element in question is emphasised.
Rituals counteracting divorce should be undertaken, and it is said one will not survive a complex of seventy-three diseases. When one's
seventy-third year dawns, the predictions resemble those of the thirteenth year.
The harshness of hostile adversarial circumstances (dgra-gshed rtsub) occurs whenever one's own year-sign coin-
cides with a seventh-removed aspect (bdun-zur). Specifically, in the seventh year there are adversarial forces to be ritually averted; the
nineteenth is the time for making money; the thirty-first in an identity-relationship is the time when divorce may occur; the forty-third in
a son-relationship is the time when there are hostile forces opposing one's wealth and prosperity; and the fifty-fifth in a friend-relation-
ship, is the time when there are hostile forces making respiration difficult. Diverse rituals are prescribed to counteract such obstacles.
The harshness of neighbouring signs (khyim-mtshes rtsub) occurs when one has a year-sign sharing the same des-
tiny element as the present year. Here there is a risk that diseases will remain in a prodromal stage for a year, and disasters will ensue,
requiring business projects to be abandoned, charms (gto) to be made, and extensive longevity rituals to be undertaken.
The harshness of the three compatible signs (thun-gsum rtsub) occurs when one shares an identical luck element
with that of the present year. This portends that wholesome nutritious food will be lost and that one will be accused by scoundrels and
afflicted by ill health. One should avoid dark houses and long journeys, making appropriate offerings to the male gods (pho-lha) and hostile
gods (dgra-lha), while performing rituals and making thread-crosses to avert hostile forces.
The harshness of obstacles to the ancestral tombs (sri-ngan pha-mes dur-keg rtsub) occurs when the trigram,
numeric square, outer planetary aspect and year-sign all coincide with the time when the demons governing the death of the paternal
ancestors are present. Disturbances around the tombs indicate that the dead are sending signals to the living, for which reason prayers
should be made to the ancestral spirits, the tombs properly sealed, the Avatamsaka Sūtra should be recited, and the burial site changed or
transformed. Obstacles to the dead are particularly hazardous for the living when the year of the death conflicts with the present year,
forming a multiple of nine, tomb-sign, natural obstacle or seventh-removed aspect (bdun-zur).
The harshness of spouses (bza'-shug rtsub) is said to occur when spouses share an identical current trigram.16 This
convergence is a time when the couple have diverse experiences of happiness and sorrow. Rituals should therefore be performed, taking
both the numeric square and trigrams into account. Misfortunes will be pacified if charms (gto) are made, and suitable ritual protection is
undertaken to ward against separation at such junctures.
Lastly, the harshness of the stealthy secret obstacles (gsang-keg rkun-po rtsub), which are hard to discern or iden-
tify, is said to occur when one's natal trigram coincides with that of the present year. In particular, a mother's trigram may create secret
obstacles for the child. For example, if the mother's trigram is Li a son will have secret obstacles, and if it is Kham a daughter will have
secret obstacles. In this way fearsome infectious diseases might strike, or there may be accusations and disputes resulting in loss of reputa-
tion. If there are severe afflictions, there will certainly be all sorts of physical and mental disorders. One should therefore avoid travelling
in front of an invalid and should recite the Sūtra of Amitāyus, make the ru-shan-la sprod-bdud thread-cross, and so forth.
Furthermore, if one of the four adversarial signs coincides with the present year, one may fall ill or die. Rituals
that ransom the vitality from death should be undertaken, or else rituals that counteract the influence of these four signs on the body, des-
tiny or luck elements. When the ‘greater or lesser death wishes' (ro-'dod che-chung) are present, one should avoid business and foreign
travel. The body may be wounded and there will be anxieties. If all seven aspects of harshness are present in a single household within a
given year, specific rituals are prescribed to alleviate the situation, such as the construction of stūpas and recitation of the Mārīcī Dhāraṇī.
When such aspects occur it is particularly dangerous if the destiny elements form enemy-or adversarial relationships.
Chart 6.4 indicates that none of these seven aspects of harshness is present during the earth tiger year in the case
of a subject born in the fire dragon year.
0
6.4 Exemplary chart
Seven pebbles of harshness (rtsub-rdel bdun)
harshness of natural obstacles (rang-keg rtsub)
harshness of hostile adversarial circumstances (dgra-gshed rtsub)
harshness of neighbouring signs (khyim-mtshes rtsub)
harshness of the three compatible signs (thun-gsum rtsub)
harshness of obstacles to the ancestral tombs (sri-ngan pha-mes dur-keg rtsub)
harshness of spouses (bza'-shug rtsub)
harshness of the stealthy secret obstacles (gsang-keg rkun-po rtsub)
This topic is summarised by Lo-chen Dharmaśrī in the following verses (Moonbeams, ff. 28b–29a):
The harshness of spouses, " 7 known as skyam-zla, 18
Occurring when a year-sign of the cycle sharing an identical destiny element
Thereafter, the following seven pebbles indicating harshness' (are placed).
Occurring when the trigrams of a married couple converge on an identical trigram;
These represent: the harshness of natural obstacles
coincides with the present year;
The harshness of the three compatible signs
Occurring when one's own year-sign coincides with the present year;
And the harshness of the stealthy secret obstacles 19
The harshness of hostile adversarial circumstances
Occurring when one has a luck element identical (to that of the present year];
Occurring when the present year] coincides with one's own natal trigram.
Black pebbles should be placed if such harsh conditions are present,
Occurring (when one's own year-sign) coincides with a seventh-removed aspect (bdun-zur);
The harshness [of obstacles to the ancestral tombs),
And white ones if they are absent.
The harshness of neighbouring signs
Occurring when the present year and trigram] coincide with negative demons,
Such as the demons frequenting the paternal ancestors' tombs;



232
The White Beryl
Inner divination of obstacle years based on
the trigrams (White Beryl, ff. 2562-263b)
Having discussed the so-called outer branch of divination made on the basis of the years, the next topic concerns the inner (nang) branch
of divination based on the trigrams. In White Beryl, this section includes an analysis of the circumstances associated with each of the indi-
vidual trigrams along with the charms (gto) that offer appropriate protection; and the twenty-seven general obstacles associated with the
trigrams. Only the latter are depicted in the manuscript and discussed here.
Generally speaking, prognostications are made concerning the conjunction of the majority of family members
within a single household on a specific trigram or combination of trigrams, as indicated on Plate 9, fig. 6, and Supplementary Plate 17, fig.
13. Accordingly, the conjunction of the majority with the Li trigram is known as the ‘implosion of the heavens, which fills everything'
(spyi-gang gnam-rdib), portending that it will be particularly inauspicious for adult girls, and that there will be contagious diseases and
ailments of the head, eyes and upper part of the body. The conjunction of the majority with the Khon trigram is known as the ‘rending of
the earth’, portending that elderly female relatives will have warts and that hostile accusations will flare up. The conjunction of the
majority with the Dva trigram portends turbulence due to demonic forces, and painful afflictions for children of average age. The con-
junction of the majority with the Khen trigram suggests harsh portents for old men, afflictions due to dog bites, and so forth. The con-
junction of the majority with the Kham trigram is known as the churning of the ocean depths' or the digging of earth which fills the legs’
(rkang-gang sa-bru), portending that small boys will be prone to diseases of the perinephrium and to swelling of the urethra. The conjunc-
tion of the majority with the Gin trigram portends that older boys will be afflicted, the right leg and right side being prone to leprosy and
skin diseases, and they will be cursed by angina or muscular spasms. The conjunction of the majority with the Zin trigram portends ill-
auspices for small girls, suggesting there will be sharp pains of the right side. Lastly, the conjunction of the majority with the Zon tri-
gram portends madness or bad omens afflicting older girls. Various ritual means are recommended to counteract such portents.
Plate 9, fig. 6
འཕུངས་ཆགས་བརྩི་བ། །
ཁྱིམ་ནང་མི་མངས་ཀྱི་སྤར་ཁ་
གླིང༌ཡུལུག
འབྲག
དང་གང་མཐོ་གར་
MFANYA1 RON
1
NgKaLarazakauska14
ནག༔
གཤེད་བཞི་རང་གི་ཐོག་བསྟན་མཚོའཉེར་རོ།
།
Plate 9, fig. 6 (Ms I: ff. 37-39): Calculation of the twenty-seven general categories of obstacle year made on the basis of the trigram conjunctions of the family members (White Beryl, ff. 2596–261b)
Calculations based on the conjunctions of the majority of family members with a specific trigram (khyim-nas mi-mangs-kyi spar-kha 'phungs-chags brtsi-ba)
Conjunctions with Li Conjunctions with Conjunctions with Conjunctions with Conjunctions with Conjunctions with Conjunctions with Conjunctions with Conjunctions with
Kham
Li and Kham
Khon
Dva
Khen
Zin
Zon
Ox
Gin
Sheep Dog
Khon Khen
Dragon
Zon
Complex
Complex
Complex
Cin
conjunctions of
conjunctions of
Dva and Zin
conjunctions of
Khon and Kham
Complex
conjunctions of
Gin and Zon
Li and Khen
are known as the
suggest harsh
portend that older
portend ill-auspices
portend madness
are known as the
are known as the
are known as the
are known as the
the outcome is particularly
severe when any of these four
'implosion of the
heavens, which fills
m
are known as the are known as the
churning of the 'crumbling cairn'
ocean depths' or the (mtho-yor 'gyel-ba),
'digging of earth portending that
which fills the legs' heaven and earth
(rkang-gang sa-bru), will be torn asunder.
are known as the portend turbulence
'rending of the earth, due to demonic
portending that forces, and colic
elderly female afflicting a middle
relatives will have child.
warts, and that
portents for old
en, afflictions due
to dog bites and
boys will be afflicted, for small girls, or bad omens
the right leg and suggesting there will afflicting older girls.
right side being be sharp pains of
prone to leprosy and the right side.
"felt wrapping
(phying-thums gri),
portending a harsh
outcome for old men
and girls of average
everything' (spyi-
'piercing of the
dagger' (gri-phur
'debs), portending
inauspicious
outcomes for boys
and girls of
'crossing of black playing of dice'
Spears' (mdung-nag (cho-lo rtse),
bsnohor
auguring ill for older
delivering sorrow' boys and girls.
adversarial year-signs conjoin with
their respective trigrams, as
indicated above (gshed-bzhi rang-
gi-thog bab-na mchi-ba nyer-ro).
so forth.
gang gnam-rdib),
portending that it
skin diseases, and
(mya-ngan gtong
will be particularly
portending that
hostile accusations
that one will be
age.
kyang), portending a
harsh outcome for
inauspicious for
small boys will be
will flare up.
cursed by angina
average age,
adult girls, and that
prone to diseases of
and muscular
inducing pains and
old women and
spasms.
blood disorders.
small boys.
there will be
the perinephrium
contagious diseases, and to swelling of
and ailments of the
the urethra.
head, the eyes and
the upper part of
the body.
ཤིག་ཉིངས་སའི་ངན་པ་
Plate 17, fig. 13
I
2
yugte
+
à exigloigt Trious forcija
li
Kham
Gin
Zin
Zon
Plate 17, fig. 13 (Ms ll: ff. 6–8): Prognostications concerning the trigram conjunctions of the majority of family members (White Beryl, ff. 2596–260a)
The following are the inauspicious conjunctions associated directly with the trigrams (spar-kha rang-thog phungs-pa'i ngan-pa)
Khon
Dva
Khen
The conjunction coinciding with the The conjunction coinciding with The conjunction coinciding with the The conjunction coinciding with the
Li trigram is known as the 'implosion the Khon trigram is known as
Dva trigram is known as 'turbulence Khen trigram is known as the
of the heavens, which fills everything the 'rending of the earth'
due to demonic forces' (dva-
‘rending of the heights' (khen-
(li-phungs spyi-gang gnam-rdib). (khon-phungs sa gzhung-ra). phungs bdud-dpung gYos).
phungs sgang-ra).
The conjunction coinciding with the
The conjunction coinciding with
Kham trigram is known as the
the Zon trigram is known as the
The conjunction coinciding with
the Gin trigram is known as the
'harshness for older boys' (gin-
phungs bu-che rtsub).
The conjunction coinciding with the
Zin trigram is known as 'ill-auspices
for small girls' (zin-phungs
bu-mo chung ngan).
'churning of the ocean depths' (kham-
'restriction on older girls'
phungs rgya-mtsho gting 'khrugs).
(zon-phungs bu-mo che dog).



233
Divinations of obstacle years
The sequence of conjunctions associated with the trigrams also includes the so-called 'four gates to mārd' (bdud-sgo bzhi), which are
depicted on Supplementary Plate 17, fig. 14. These comprise: the oppression of Li upon Kham, which portends harshness for males; the
oppression of Dva upon Zin, which portends harshness for females; the oppression of Khen upon Zon, which portends affliction of
corpses; and the oppression of Gin upon Khon, which portends that graves will be dug. 20
Plate 17, fig. 14
23roite
जत्लान्दर
Plate 17, fig. 14 (Ms II: ff. 9–10): Prognostications based on trigram conjunctions known as the 'four gates to māra' (White Beryl, f. 260a)
Prognostications based on trigram conjunctions known as the 'four gates to māra' (spar-kha'i bdud-sgo bzh)
The oppression of Li upon Kham
The oppression of Dva upon Zin
The oppression of Khen upon Zon
The oppression of Gin upon Khon
portends harshness for males (pho-rtsub).
portends harshness for females (mo-rtsub).
portends the presence of corpses (ro-'dzin)
portends that graves will be dug (dong-brko).
Furthermore, the so-called 'four arrow'chart (mdel-bar bzhi; Plate 9, fig. 8) indicates a conjunction afflicting the four cardinal directions.
Among them Li in the south is the arrow directed at the living and the dead, Dva in the west is the arrow directed at heaven and earth,
Kham in the north is the arrow directed at treacherous spirits (sri-can),21 and Zin in the east is the arrow directed at existence or rebirth
(srid-pa). Then, the so-called 'four arrow-tip' chart (mdel-rtse bzhi; also Plate 9, fig. 8) indicates a parallel conjunction afflicting the four
intermediate directions.
The chart known as the 'separation of sun and shade' (gdags-srib bye-bral; Plate 9, fig. 8), in which three trigrams
(Zon, Zin and Gin) are stacked in the east and another three (Khon, Dva and Khen) are stacked in the west, portends disintegration and
division. The chart in which the southern trigrams, Zon, Li and Khen, are stacked above their respective northern trigrams, Gin, Kham
and Khon (Plate 9, fig. 8), indicates division between top and bottom (lho-byang phu-mda'i bye-bral). The chart of Khen stacked above
Khon (Plate 9, fig. 8) is the one indicating division between heaven and earth (gnam-sa'i bye-bral). 22
Complex conjunctions of
Complex conjunctions of
Complex conjunctions of
Complex conjunctions of
Complex conjunctions of
Complex conjunctions of
the trigrams Khen and Kham
the 'four arrow' chart
the 'four arrow-tip' chart
the chart in which the
Khen and Khon
Plate 9, fig. 8 (Ms l: ff. 37–39): Prognoses of obstacle years made on the basis of complex trigram conjunctions
Complex conjunctions of
Complex conjunctions of
Complex conjunctions of
the three right-sided
imbalance in the three
the trigrams Khen and Zon
trigrams (gYas-gsum khal left-sided trigrams
yo), i.e. Zin, Zon and Gin,
(gYon-gsum do-ma mnyam),
known as the 'swaying load i.e. Khon, Dva and Khen
the chart in which the three
trigrams Zon, Zin and Gin
(mdel-bar bzh), i.e.SLI,
southern trigrams Zon,
W Dva, N Kham and E Zin
(mdel-rtse bzh),
comprising: S Khon;
W Khen; N Gin; and E Zon
are stacked vertically in
Li and Khen are stacked
the east and the trigrams
above their respective
Khon, Dva and Khen
northern trigrams, Gin,
are stacked vertically
Kham and Khon
in the west
portend that there will be bad
are known as the 'wrong turn of
are known as the 'crossing
are known to afflict the 'four
are known to afflict the four
are known as the 'separation
portend division between north
portend division between
auspices for male servants,
augur ill for female servants,
portending grief, falling
masonry, and knife accidents.
the dice' (cho-log), portending
of the back' (rgyab-bsnol),
cardinal directions', i.e. Li (S) is
intermediate directions in a
between sun and shade'
and south, or between top and
heaven and earth (gnam-sa'i
running the risk of riding
inauspicious outcomes.
portending inauspicious
the arrow directed at the living
parallel manner to those of the
bottom (Iho-byang phu-mda''i
bye-bra).
(gdags-srib bye-bra),
portending disintegration
accidents or falling over a
outcomes.
and the dead, Dva (W) is the
four cardinal directions.
bye-bra).
precipice, for which reason they
arrow directed at heaven and
and division.
are admonished to be careful
earth, Kham (N) is the arrow
directed at treacherous spirits [of
while travelling.
destruction), and Zin (E) is the
arrow directed at existence or
rebirth (srid-pa).
ei
AG
252ES'AGI
གདཔྱད་བྱེད་ལས།
གར་
དགས་བ་བྱེ་བྲལ།
ཞཔལ་བ
AGORA
When the impact of the relationships between the trigrams is further analysed, a complex conjunction of the trigrams Li and
Kham, known as the 'crumbling cairn' (mtho-yor 'gyel-ba; Plate 9, fig. 6), portends that heaven and earth will be torn asunder.23 A com-
plex conjunction of the trigrams Dva and Zin, known as the 'piercing of the dagger' (gri-phur 'debs; Plate 9, fig. 6) is inauspicious for boys
and girls of average age, inducing pains and blood disorders. 24 A complex conjunction of the trigrams Li and Khen, known as the 'felt
wrapping' (phying-thums gril; Plate 9, fig. 6), portends a harsh outcome for old men and girls of average age. 25 A complex conjunction of
the trigrams Khon and Kham, known as the “crossing of black spears' (mdung-nag bsnol) or ‘delivering sorrow' (mya-ngan gtod; Plate 9, fig.
6), portends a harsh outcome for old women and small boys.26 When the woman has the trigram Li and the man has the trigram Dva, the
portent is known as the “felt wrapping' (phying-thums gril-ba; Supplementary Plate 17, fig. 15), or when the woman has the trigram Khon
and the man has the trigram Kham it is known as the loss of the wife' (byen-mo shor-ba; also Plate 17, fig. 15), and these both augur ill-
Plate 9, fig. 8



234
The White Beryl
health.27 A complex conjunction of the trigrams Gin and Zon, known as the playing of dice (cho-lo rtse; Plate 9, fig. 6), augurs ill for older
boys and girls.28 A complex conjunction of the trigrams Khon and Zon is known as the ‘two hands beating the breasť (lag-gnyis brang-
brdung; Plate 9, fig. 7).29 A complex conjunction of the trigrams Gin and Khen (error on plate) is known as the 'two feet digging the earth’
(rkang-gnyis sa-brko/bru; Plate 9, fig. 7).90 These last two cases are an ingress for demons. A complex conjunction of the trigrams Khon
and Zon is known as the 'wrong turn of the dice' (cho-log, Plate 9, fig. 8);31 and a complex conjunction of the trigrams Khen and Kham is
known as the 'crossing of the back' (rgyab-bsnol; Plate 9, fig. 8). 92
Plate 17, fig. 15 (Ms II: ff. 6–7): Further portents based on combined trigrams (White Beryl, ff. 2606–261a)
gigarrobaccara
The portent is known as the 'felt wrapping'
The portent is known as the loss of the wife'
engjast
(phying-thums gril-ba)
when the woman (bud-med)
(byen-mo shor-ba)
when the woman (bud-med
and the man (skyes-pa)
has the trigram Dva
and the man (pho)
has the trigram Kham
has the trigram Li
has the trigram Khon
Plate 17, fig. 15
In addition, if conjunctions associated with all four earth element trigrams situated in the four intermediate directions arise (mtshams-
bzhi'i babs-nas bzhi-langs; Plate 9, fig. 7), it portends that elderly or young couples may have to endure false accusations and pay compen-
sation. If conjunctions associated with all four trigrams in the cardinal directions arise, the four odd-numbered trigrams will be shaken
(phyogs-bzhi'i babs-na se-bzhi 'gul; Plate 9, fig. 7), portending loss of wealth and marital disputes, particularly inauspicious for adult males.
If all eight trigrams are in association, the prediction is known as the “closure of the eightfold door’ (brgyad-sgo
bcad) or the 'closure of the victorious door' (rgyal-sgo bcad; Plate 9, fig. 7). In this case, the outcome is generally auspicious despite some
sources claiming that there will be increasingly harsh results in years coinciding with an adversarial aspect.
If the impact of the three upper trigrams (Khon, Li and Zon) is conjoined (stod-gsum 'dom-'jal; Plate 9, fig. 7), the
prediction is known as the ‘two hands beating the breast and weeping eyes', and it will be inauspicious for the old and the young, provok-
ing sorrows, divorce and the ingress of primordial bewitchers (ye-'brog). Conversely, if the impact of the three lower trigrams (Gin, Kham
and Khen) is conjoined (smad-gsum), the prediction is known as the ‘onset of disputation' (gyod lag-lhung, Plate 9, fig. 7), portending that
the ‘two feet will sweep the ground', i.e. that young persons will be susceptible to riding accidents, falling into ravines, imprisonment,
grief, possession by primordial bewitchers (ye-'brog) and accusations.
Plate 9, fig. 7
Trasa
***WWAR 43VHT
བཞི་ལངས།
ཕྱོགས་བཞིར་བབས་ན་སེ་
རྐང་གཉིས་ས སྙད་གསུམ་འདོམ་
བཞི་འགུལ།
རྒྱལ་ས་བབ།
ལག་གཉིས་
བྲང་བཟུང།
སྦྱར་གསུམ་གྱིད་
ལག་ལྷང།
Complex conjunctions of the
Plate 9, fig. 7 (Ms 1: ff. 37–39): Prognoses of obstacle years made on the basis of complex trigram conjunctions, continued
Complex conjunctions of the four
Complex conjunctions of the four
Combined portents associated with
trigrams of the intermediate
trigrams of the cardinal directions,
all eight trigrams, i.e. Ckun-babs, SLi,
directions, i.e. SW Khon, SE Khen,
i.e.SLI, W Dva, N Kham and E Zin
SW Khon, W Dva, NW Khen, N Kham,
Complex conjunctions of the
trigrams Zon and Khon
Complex conjunctions of the three
upper trigrams Zon, Li and Khon
Complex conjunctions of the three
lower trigrams Gin, Kham and Khen
trigrams Zon and Khen
NE Gin and NW Zon
NE Gin, E Zin and SE Zon
are known as the 'rising of the four earth
are known as the 'reverberation of the four
are known as the 'closure of the eightfold door' are known as the 'two hands beating the
are known as the 'two hands beating the
are known as the 'two feet digging the earth'
(rkang-gnyis sa-brko/bru), portending an
are known as the 'falling fighting hands of the
three lower trigrams' (smad-gsum gyer/gyod-
trigrams in the four intermediate directions'
odd trigrams in the four cardinal directions'
(brgyad-sgo bcad or the 'closure of the
breast' (lag-gnyis brang-brdung),
breast and weeping eyes', or 'armspan
(mtshams-bzhi'i babs-na sa-bzhi-langs),
victorious door' (rgyal-sgo bcad); in this case,
portending an ingress for demons.
ingress for demons.
measurement of the upper three trigrams'
lag Ihung), portending that the two feet will
(phyogs-bzhi'i babs-na se-bzhi 'gul,
portending loss of wealth and marital
disputes, particularly inauspicious for
the outcome is generally auspicious.
(stod-gsum 'dom-'jal), portending bad
portending that elderly or young couples
may have to endure false accusations and
sweep the ground,' i.e. that young persons will
pay compensation
adult males.
auspices for the old and the young,
provoking sorrows, divorce, and the ingress
of ye-'brog demons.
be susceptible to riding accidents, falling into
ravines, imprisonment, grief, possession by
primordial bewitchers, and accusations.
The combined impact of imbalance (lit. ‘swaying loads') in the three right-sided trigrams (gYas-gsum khal-yo; Plate 9, fig. 8), i.e. Zin, Zon
and Gin, portends that there will be bad auspices for male servants, running the risk of riding accidents or falling over a precipice, for
which reason they are admonished to be careful while travelling. The combined impact of imbalance in the three left-sided trigrams
(gYon-gsum do-ma mnyam; Plate 9, fig. 8), i.e. Khen, Dva and Khon, augurs ill for female servants, portending grief, falling masonry and
knife accidents. In all these cases, counteracting rituals are prescribed.
The chart depicting the five categories of year-sign that are securely cherished (snying-bzung Inga; Plate 9,
fig. 9) is described as follows. The securely cherished year-signs are those that form a friend-relationship with the majority of
household members' year-signs when the element of the present year's trigram coincides with the majority element. For example, if
the majority of a household's year-signs are the horse or snake, coinciding with the trigram Li, other household members with a bird
or monkey sign are properly cherished since these signs are in a friend-relationship. Similarly, if the majority of a household's year-
signs are the tiger or hare, coinciding with the trigram Zin, other household members with an ox, dragon, sheep or dog sign are
properly cherished; if the majority of a household's year-signs are the mouse or pig, coinciding with the trigram Kham, other
household members with a horse or snake sign are properly cherished; if the majority of a household's year-signs are the bird or
monkey, coinciding with the trigram Dva, other household members with a tiger or hare sign are properly cherished; and if the
majority of a household's year-signs are the ox, dragon, sheep or dog, coinciding with the trigram Khon, other household members with



235
Divinations of obstacle years
a mouse or pig sign are properly cherished. If, on the other hand, the signs of the minority of household members form a mother- or
son relationship with the majority signs and trigram, the outcome will be mediocre, and if they form an enemy- or adversarial relation-
ship, the outcome will be inauspicious.
ལོ་མང་ཡོད་
DANSE
སོ་ག་གཉིས།
>དངས ་བ
༨པ་བར
Plate 9, fig. 9
Plate 9, fig. 9 (Ms I: ff. 38–39): Chart indicating the five categories of year-sign that are securely cherished
horse or snake
or hare
mouse or pig
monkey or bird
ox, sheep, dog or dragon
If the majority of a
household's year-signs
are (lo mang-po)
coinciding with the current
Li
Tin
Kham
Dva
Khon
bird or monkey
ox, sheep, dog or dragon
horse or snake
tiger or hare
mouse or pig
are securely cherished
are securely cherished
are securely cherished
are securely cherished
trigram (babs-spar)
a minority with the year-
signs (lo gcig-gnyist)
are included among the
category of five which are
securely cherished
(snying-bzung Ingal)
because they form
friend-relationships
are securely cherished
(snying-bzung)
(snying-bzung)
(snying-bzung)
(snying-bzung)
(snying-bzung)
The chart outlining the five confusions ('dzol-rdib lnga; Plate 9, fig. 10) portends the “roaming of the life-spiriť (bla-khyams), which
occurs when the subject's natal year-sign forms an enemy-relationship with both the trigram and the present year. For example,
this occurs when the subject’s natal sign is the horse or snake, coinciding with the trigram Kham and the mouse or pig year, or when
the subject's natal sign is the bird or monkey, coinciding with the Li trigram and the horse or snake year, or when the subject's natal
sign is the mouse or pig, coinciding with the Khon trigram and the ox, dragon, sheep or dog year, or when the subject's natal sign is
the tiger or hare, coinciding with the Dva trigram and the bird or monkey year; or when a subject of the ox, dragon, sheep or dog
sign coincides with the Zin trigram and the tiger or hare year. In all such cases portending the “roaming of the life-spiriť, specific
longevity rituals should be performed.
Plate 9, fig. 10
སྒྲིབ་བྱའི་ལོ་
བབས་སར།
གནས་ལ།
གནམ་ལོ་དང་སླར་ཁ་དགྲ་ཐོག་བབ་པ་འཇོལ་དེབ་བམ་
བླ་འཁྱམས།
Plate 9, fig. 10 (Ms I: ff. 37–38): Calculating the 'five confusions' or the 'roaming of the life-spirit'
Zin
When the subject's year-sign (rtsi-bya'i lo) is
horse or snake
bird or monkey
mouse or pig
tiger or hare
ox, sheep, dog or dragon
coinciding with the current trigram (babs-span)
Kham
Khon
Dva
and the present year is (gnam-lo)
mouse or pig
horse or snake
sheep
bird or monkey
tiger or hare
The chart outlining the five confusions ('dzol-rdib Inga), or “roaming of the life-spirit (bla-khyams), occurs when the subject's year-sign forms an enemy-relationship with both the trigram and the present year (gnam-lo-dang
spar-kha dgra-thog bab-pa 'dzol-deb-bam bla-'khyams)
The last of the twenty-seven general obstacles associated with the trigrams concerns the coincidence of the heavenly gate and
the earthly gate, at which times suitable precautions should be taken (Plate 9, fig. 11). Here, the element of the trigram corresponding
to the heavenly gate is in a mother-relationship to that of the natal year-sign, while that corresponding to the earthly gate is in a son-
relationship. For example, when the subject's natal sign is the tiger or hare, the heavenly gate trigram is Kham and the earthly
gate trigram is Li. Similarly, when the subject's natal sign is the horse or snake, the heavenly gate trigram is Zin and the earthly gate
trigram is Khon, Khen, Gin or Zon. When the subject's natal sign is the bird or monkey, the heavenly gate trigram is Khon and
the earthly gate trigram is Kham. When the subject's natal sign is the mouse or pig, the heavenly gate trigram is Dva and the earthly
gate trigram is Zin. When the subject's natal sign is the ox, dragon, sheep or dog, the heavenly gate trigram is Li and the earthly
gate trigram is Dva. Finally, regardless of the subjects natal sign, the heavenly gate trigram is generally held to be Khen and the
earthly gate trigram Khon.



236
The White Beryl
རྩིབ་བྱའི་
140
གནམ་
1
Plate 9, fig. 11
Plate 9, fig. 11 (Ms I: ff. 38–39): The coincidence of specific year-signs with heavenly gate and earthly gate trigrams
Precautions should be taken when the subject's
tiger or hare horse or snake
bird or monkey
mouse or pig
any sign
sheep, dog, ox
or dragon
year-sign (rtsi-bya'i lo) is
(10-rtags kun-gy
Kham
Zin
Khon
Dva
Khen
coinciding with the following heavenly gate trigram
(spar-kha'i gnam-sgo), which is in a mother-relationship
and the following earthly gate trigram (spar-kha'i sa-sgo),
which is in a son-relationship
Li
Khon, Khen,
Kham
Zin
Dva
Khon
Gin or Zon
Bottom Detail of Plate
prescribed rituals when the majority of household members
If the trigram of the present year coincides with its own natural year-sign, the prediction is known as the eye cast on the family' (rus-
mig), as depicted on Supplementary Plate 17, fig. 16. This portends that one will be angry with oneself, and so forth. The outcome is par-
ticularly severe when such trigrams coincide with one of the four adversarial year-signs, as when Gin coincides with the ox year, Khon
with the sheep year, Khen with the dog year or Zon with the dragon year.
have the numeric squares White One, Six and Eight
1991
drugikientzat
Plate 17, fig. 16
Plate 17, fig. 16 (Ms II: ff. 7-10): The coincidence of the current trigram with its natural year-sign (White Beryl, f. 262a)
Inauspicious portents known as the 'eye cast on the family' may occur when the current trigram coincides with its own natural [year-sign] (rang-thog babs spar-kha'i rus-mig-gi ngan-pa), as follows
Li coinciding with the horse
Khon coinciding with the
Dva coinciding with the bird
Khen coinciding with the
Kham coinciding with the
Gin coinciding with the
Zin coinciding with the
Zon coinciding with the
or snake year
sheep year
or monkey year
dog year
mouse or pig year
ox year
tiger or hare year
dragon year



237
Divinations of obstacle years
Wiggingaratgicha
Hartnelopardal
dag
Belleairndor
Trendre
did
Plate 17, fig. 17
Additionally, as depicted on Supplementary Plate 17, fig. 17, it is said that during a year governed by the current trigram Gin
when a couple have the trigrams Khon and Kham, the male may be confronted by the portent known as “entering the trap of demons'
(pho bdud-kyi rgya chug). During a year governed by the trigram Khen, when a couple have the trigrams Dva and Kham, the male may
be confronted by the ‘harsh trap of demons', and the female by the portent known as 'Yama's list (mo khram btab). During a year gov-
erned by the trigram Zon, when a couple have the trigrams Dva and Kham, the woman may be confronted by Yama's list indicating
near fatal illness or death' (na-mi 'chi mi-na mchi). During a year governed by the trigram Zon, a couple born under the trigrams Li
and Zin may also be confronted by the portent known as “Yama's lisť (gshin-rje'i khram btab). During a year governed by the
trigram Gin, when a couple have the trigrams Khon and Kham, someone born under one of the three compatible year-signs may be
confronted by the portent known as the “squandering of wealth' (nor-gang stong). During a year governed by the trigram Gin, a
couple who have the trigrams Li and Khen may be confronted by the portent known as “death of hoofed animals' (rmig-'dum 'chi).
During a year governed by the trigram Dva, a couple who have the trigrams Gin and Zin may be confronted by the portent known
as 'death of goats and sheep' (ra-lug 'chi). During a year governed by the trigram Kham, a couple of the fire dog and dragon signs may
be confronted by the portent known as 'woman wearing a rain-cape' (mdun-gzhu gyon).
'squandering of wealth'
'death of hoofed animals'
'death of sheep and goats'
'wearing a woman's rain-cape'
(nor-gyi gang-stong)
(rmig-'dum 'chi)
(rva-lug 'chil)
(mdun-gzhu gyon)
Plate 17, fig. 17 (Ms Il: ff. 6–9): Prognostications concerning the conjunction of a couple's natal trigrams or year-signs with the trigram of the present year (White Beryl, f. 262a/b)
The portent is known as the male 'entering the trap the male 'entering the trap of
[Yama's list indicating) near 'Yama's list' (gshin-rje'i
of demons' (pho-bdud-
demons', or the female being fatal illness or death' (na-mi khram btab)
kyi rgyar chug)
on Yama's list' (pho-bdud-kyi 'chi mi-na mch)
rgya rtsub mo khram-btab)
when a couple have the Khon and Kham
Dva and Kham
Dva and Kham
Li and Zin
following natal trigrams
(pho-mo'i skyes-span)
and the current trigram is Gin
Zon
Zon
the following (babs-span)
Khon and Kham
Li and Khen
Gin and Zin
Fire dog and dragon
Khen
Gin
Gin
Dva
Kham
In all such negative cases, if the appropriate rituals are correctly undertaken, the negative conjunctions will turn out to be auspicious. As
such (as depicted on Supplementary Plate 17, fig. 18), the portent of the Zin conjunction will come to possess eight excellences, which
include recovery from chronic disease, thriving cattle, successful travel, immunity to hostile impediments, and the accomplishment of
one's wishes. The portent of the Gin conjunction will come to possess five excellences, namely victory in disputations, the finding of lost
property, immunity from harmful foes, recovery from ill-health, and the benefit of all beings. The portent of the Khen conjunction will
come to possess eight excellences, including the finding of lost property, freedom from evil spirits, prosperity, and so forth.
dGNiGML
G
ཅན་སོགས་
ས་སྤྱད་ཡན་
Plate 17, fig. 18 (Ms Il: ff. 10, 6): The excellent attributes accruing when such conjunctions are averted (White Beryl, f. 262b)
The following Zin conjunction comes The following Gin conjunction comes The following Khen conjunction comes
to possess eight excellences
to possess five excellences
to possess eight excellences
(zin-phungs legs-pa brgyad Idan) (gin-phungs legs-pa Inga Idan)
(khen-phungs legs-pa brgyad-Idan)
Zin above
Gin above
Khen above
Zin below
Gin below
Khen below
In addition, it is said that if trigrams with elements in a mother- or son-relationship are on top the outcome will be gentle, but if those
in an enemy-relationship are on top the outcome will be harsh. For example, as indicated on Supplementary Plate 17, fig. 19, if
the four female trigrams (Khon, Zin, Khen and Zon) are present, the auspicious prediction is known as the 'securing of the four upper
beams' (stod-gdung bzhi-tshugs); and if the four male trigrams (Dva, Kham, Khen and Gin) are present, it is known as the 'securing of
the four lower bases'. If Kham is stacked above Zin, it portends that one's wishes may be extensively fulfilled. 34 If Li is stacked above
Zin, it portends that the great fires of happiness will burn.35 If Li is stacked above Khon, it portends that the citadel of happiness will be
built. 36 If Dva is stacked above Khen, it portends that there will be extensive foliage.37 If Dva is stacked above Kham, it portends that the
spring of existence will come forth.38 If Li is stacked above Khen, it portends that happiness will be secure and extensive. 39 If Dva is
stacked above Zin, it portends that wealth and prosperity will accrue.40 If Khon is stacked above Dva, it portends that the hand of a corpse
will ring [a bell7.41 Lastly, if Khen or Gin is stacked above Zin, it portends that sorrows will be dispelled.42
Plate 17, fig. 18



238
The White Beryl
Klastroacia
ནུས གཅ བཅའ་འདོན་
བྱེད་ས་མཁར་
adorna
Plate 17, fig. 19
docelalan
Araute
Latteutuure
аас
Plate 17, fig. 19 (Ms II: ff. 6-10): Auspicious predictions accruing when certain trigrams are conjoined (White Beryl, f. 262b)
'The fires of happiness
'The citadel of
'Wealth and prosperity
'The hands of a corpse
"Sorrow will be dispelled'
'The four upper beams
will be secured' (stod-
'The four lower bases
will be secured' (rmad
rkang-bzhi tshugs)
'Extensive wishes will
be fulfilled' (dpag-
bsam rgyas)
will burn
'There will be extensive 'The spring [of
foliage' (10-'dab rgyas existence] will come
forth’ (chu-mig gdol)
(sdug-rjes sangs)
'Happiness will be
secure and extensive'
(skyid-pa'i tshugs-
shing rgyas)
happiness will be
built' (skyid-pa
mkhar-btsigs)
will accrue'
(nor-gYang babs)
will ring a bell
(ro-lag khro)
gdung bzhi-tshugs)
(skyid-me 'bar)
when Khon and Khen
when Dva and Khen
when Kham
when Li
when Li
when Dva
when Dva
when Li
when Dva
when Khen or Gin
when Khon
is above Dva
are above Zin and Zon
are above Kham and Gin
is above Zin
is above Zin
is above Khon
is above Khen
is above Kham
is above Khen
is above Zin
is above Zin
Elsewhere, as depicted on Supplementary Plate 18, fig. 2, it is stated that conjunctions of the majority of family members with the tri-
gram Li portend very harsh outcomes for a minority with the trigram Dva, while conjunctions of the majority with Dva portend harsh
outcomes for a minority with Zin, conjunctions of the majority with Zin portend harsh outcomes for a minority with one of the four inter-
mediate trigrams, particularly Khon, while conjunctions of the majority with one of the four intermediate trigrams portend harsh out-
comes for a minority with Kham, and those coinciding with Kham for a minority with Li.
Plate 18, fig. 2
ཤིན་ཏུ་སྤྱོབ་
sas
40
harsh (rtsub)
Plate 18, fig. 2 (Ms II: ff. 11–13): Predictions for a minority of household members when the majority have a specific trigram conjunction (White Beryl, f. 262b)
The predicted outcome is
very harsh (shin-tu rtsub) harsh (rtsub)
harsh (rtsub)
when the majority of family members have the following Li
Dva
Zin
trigram conjunction (phal-cher phungs-spar)
for a minority with the following trigram (re-gnyis spar) Dva
Khon, Khen, Gin or Zon
harsh (rtsub)
Kham
Khon, Khen, Gin or Zon
Zin
Kham
li
If the majority of household members have a specified trigram and element conjunction, the predicted outcome for minority household
members with other specified elements is harsh, as depicted on Supplementary Plate 18, fig. 3. For example, if the majority have a con-
junction of the trigram Li and the fire element, the outcome will be harsh for a minority with the iron or water elements. If the majority
have a conjunction of the trigram Kham and the water element, the outcome will be harsh for a minority with the earth or fire element.



239
Divinations of obstacle years
If the majority have a conjunction of the Zin trigram and the wood element, the outcome will be harsh for a minority with the earth and
iron elements; and similarly, if the majority have a conjunction of the Dva trigram and the iron element, there will be a harsh outcome for
a minority with the wood or fire element.
Plate 18, fig. 3
Sardor
Plate 18, fig. 3 (Ms II: ff. 14–15): Harsh predictions for minority family members when the majority have a specified trigram and element (White Beryl, f. 262b)
Harsh outcomes predicted for minorities when the majority have a specified trigram and element conjunction, known as the 'four tombs cutting off vitality' (Srog-chad dur-bzhi)
When the majority have the trigram Li
When the majority have the trigram Kham
When the majority have the trigram Zin
When the majority have the trigram Dva
and the fire element
and the water element
and the wood element
and the iron element
the outcome will be harsh for a minority
the outcome will be harsh for a minority
the outcome will be harsh for a minority
the outcome will be harsh for a minority
with the iron or water element
with the earth or fire element
with the earth or iron element
with the wood or fire element
In addition, as depicted on Supplementary Plate 18, fig. 4, there are dire predictions when a majority of household members have a
specified year-sign and trigram conjunction. For example, divorce and death are predicted when a majority have the bird or monkey
year-sign and the trigram Li. Accidental death due to injury is predicted when a majority have the tiger or hare sign and the trigram Dva.
Death by burning or drowning is predicted when a majority have the horse or snake sign and the trigram Dva. The ‘peg of longevity' is
predicted to be dislodged when a majority have the ox, sheep, dragon or dog sign and the trigram Zin. The ‘hat of misfortune' will be
worn when a majority have the ox sign and the trigram Khon. The heavenly gate will be exposed when a majority have the dragon sign
and the trigram Khen. Treacherous spirits of disaster (phung -sri)49 will arise when a majority have the sheep sign and the trigram Gin.
Lastly, there will be plagues and infectious diseases when a majority have the dog sign and the trigram Zon.
Glendar
Videos
ཚོ་ཕྱིར་སྣང་
GI
Plate 18, fig. 4
gagogo
ང་བུ །ས་ཕྲ་ལྷད་
the heavenly gate will be
infectious diseases and
Plate 18, fig. 4 (Ms Il: ff. 11-15): Dire predictions occurring when a majority of household members have a specified year-sign and trigram conjunction (White Beryl, ff. 2626–263a)
The following are the names of the predictions occurring (ming)
divorce and death accidental death death by fire or drowning the peg of longevity will be
(bye-bral 'chi-ba) (grir-'ch)
(me-chu klong 'da')
dislodged (tshe-phur Idang
when a majority have the following year-sign (lo)
bird or monkey
tiger or hare
horse or snake
ox, sheep, dog or dragon
and the following trigram conjunction (phungs-spar)
Dva
Dva
Zin
the hat of misfortune will
be worn (byur-zhva gyon)
ox44
treacherous spirits of disaster
will arise ('phungs-sri ldang)
exposed (gnam-sgo phye)
plagues will occur (rims-dal 'bab)
dragon
sheep
dog
li
Khon
Khen
Gin
Zon
It is said that whatever the present year, the chart of 'heavenly medicine' (gnam-sman) stands in a mother-relationship to it, while the
chart of “intimation of luck' (phyva-lon) stands in a son-relationship, the chart of 'growth through glory' (dpal-bskyed) stands in an iden-
tity-relationship, the chart of the ‘cutting influence of demons (bdud-gcod) in an enemy-relationship, and the chart of the five demons'
('dre-Inga) in a friend-relationship. For example, as shown on Supplementary Plate 18, fig. 5, when the present year-sign is the mouse or
pig, the trigram Dva, indicating the 'heavenly medicine' chart, is in a mother-relationship; Zin, indicating the intimation of luck'chart, is
in a son-relationship; Kham, indicating the ‘growth through glory' chart, is in an identity-relationship; Khon, Khen, Gin or Zon, indicat-
ing the cutting influence of demons' chart, is in an enemy-relationship; and Li, indicating the five demons' charts, is in a friend-relationship.



240
The White Beryl
all
o
291
(
AKT
asi
Qiye
འདྲེ་ལ་
Plate 18, fig. 5
Plate 18, fig. 5 (Ms ll: ff. 11-15): Trigrams indicative of the trigram charts in relationship to a given year (White Beryl, f. 263a)
When the present year-sign is (lo)
mouse or pig
tiger or hare
The following trigram, indicative of the chart of 'heavenly medicine',
Dva
Kham
horse or snake
bird or monkey
ox, sheep, dog or dragon
Zin
Khon, Khen,
Gin or Zon
Zin
Khon, Khen,
Kham
Dva
Gin or Zon
Kham
Zin
Dva
Khon, Khen,
is in a mother-relationship (ma-spar gnam-sman)
The following trigram, indicative of the neutral chart of 'intimation of luck”,
is in a son-relationship (bu-spar phyva-mnyam)
The following trigram, indicative of the chart of 'growth through glory',
is in an identity-relationship (rang-spar dpal-bskyed)
The following trigram, indicative of the chart of cutting influence of demons',
is in an enemy-relationship (dgra-spar bdud-gcod)
The following trigram, indicative of the chart of 'five demons',
is in a friend-relationship (grogs-spar 'dre-Inga)
Gin or Zon
Dva
Kham
Zin
Khon, Khen,
Gin or Zon
Khon, Khen,
Dva
Zin
Kham
Gin or Zon



241
Divinations of obstacle years
The section on the calculation of obstacle years based on the eight trigrams concludes with a description of the predicted results pertain-
mprised by these trigrams (f. 263a/b), concluding with the ‘corporal punishment (lus-
chad) chart.45
Intermediate divination of obstacle years on the basis of
the numeric squares (White Beryl, ff. 2635–269a)
This section includes an introduction to the negative numerological portents and the ritual means of securing a positive outcome, along
with the twenty-eight general obstacles associated with the numeric squares.
Now, White One, known as the ‘mirror of the gods', suggests that one should take precautions against pollution,
contagious diseases, disputations and various sorts of demonic affliction. Black Two, known as the ‘mirror of the demons', portends
divorce, forced emigration, grief and sadness. Blue Three, known as the ‘mirror of attachment spirits' (bsen-mo), suggests the turbulence
of separation and loss, the risk of sudden possession by primordial bewitchers (ye-'brog), false accusations, disputations, and so forth.
Green Four, known as the ‘mirror of serpentine spirits (nāga), suggests quarrels, afflictions due to plague-causing spirits and serpentine
water spirits, goitres, swellings, and so forth. Yellow Five, known as the ‘mirror of the spirit lords of the soil (sa-bdag), suggests bile dis-
orders, fluid of the joints, contagious diseases, chronic fevers, swellings, and depression or anger due to demonic possession. White Six,
known as the ‘mirror of king spirits' (rgyal-po), generally suggests an auspicious outcome and good reputation, yet there may be
afflictions due to demons, king spirits and malign goblins (the'u-brang), and various other ailments due to divine displeasure, including
toothache and diseases of the limbs. Red Seven, known as the ‘mirror of haunting spirits' (btsan), suggests complex afflictions due to
haunting spirits (btsan) and the ghosts of murder victims (gre-bo), or due to serpentine spirits and haunting spirits (bstan). Women
may have menstrual disorders, and there may be general blood disorders, ulcers, bile diseases and fevers. White Eight, known as the
‘mirror of countryside deities' (yul-lha), is generally auspicious, yet there may be afflictions due to demons, leading to slander and
mental disorders. Red Nine, known as the 'mirror of imprecatory goddesses', suggests afflictions due to various types of demon includ-
ing imprecatory goddesses (ma-mo), bdud-btsan46 and the ghosts of murder victims (gre-bo), and to bad luck and calamities issuing
from the ancestral tombs. One might dream of befriending the dead and there is the risk of head, lung and heart diseases, as well as of
haemorrhage, dermatitis, loss of appetite and stroke.
Various predicted outcomes and ritual remedies are then prescribed for each of these nine current numeric
squares, and for their conjunction with different natal numeric squares. For example, when the reading coincides with Yellow Five, there
will be diseases associated with the earth element, and the spirit lords of the soil or king spirits will cause affliction. One should undertake
ritual means to avert such afflictions, a stūpa should be built, and votive relics moulded. Alternatively, when a subject with a black natal
numeric square encounters a present year with a yellow numeric square, there may be serum disorders and cold diseases afflicting the
stomach and liver, as well as the recurrence of chronic aliments and pains. Ritual means should then be employed, including the recitation
of the Sūtra of Amitāyus, ablutions from the ritual vase, and the casting out of a scapegoat effigy to attract long life.
As far as the general predictions based on the numeric squares are concerned (shown on Supplementary Plate 18,
fig. 6), if the majority of household members have the numeric square White One, death will ensue even if untimely, there will be ailments
due to gods because demons of the air and ground will haunt the sap of trees, and there will be contagious pestilences (yams-nad), for
which reasons impurities should be avoided. If the majority of household members have the numeric squares White One, White Six or
White Eight, the ancestral male gods (pho-lha) will vanish into space, at which time one should ritually dispel the bewildering gods who
come in pursuit.
If the majority of household members have the numeric square Black Two, there will be disruptions and unwar-
ranted ailments due to the ‘upper demons' (ya-bdud); it will be inauspicious for servants, horses, dogs and cattle; and there will be divorce
and the break-up of the family home, for which reasons white soil should be scattered in the house, votive stūpas should be built, the
Prajñāpāramitā Sūtras should be recited, and offerings should be made to the monastic community and to beings trapped in the lower des-
tinies of animals, tormented spirits and the hells. 47
If the majority of household members have the numeric square Blue Three, the spirit lords of the soil will become
displeased, and there will be the risk of sufferings due to avalanches, fractured skulls, and hostile forces arising, for which reasons the
gTsug-gtor dkar-nag gzungs should be recited and the nag-po mgo-gsum [gtor-ma] offering should be made.
If the majority of household members have the numeric square Green Four, serpentine spirits and spirit lords of
the soil will be displeased and will cause their respective ailments, including dropsy, while diseases will also be caused by the conjunction
of hostile fire and water elements. In cases such as this, offerings should be made to the serpentine spirits, and the mtsho-sman thread-
cross should be made.
If the majority of household members have the numeric square Yellow Five, there will be afflictions due to king
spirits and bewitchers, as well as losses, bile diseases and afflictions due to curses and evil spirits, for which reasons the rgyal-mdos and
khrag-mdos thread-crosses should be made, and no enmity should be borne against Buddhist monks or Bon priests.
If the majority of household members have the numeric square Red Seven, hostile treacherous spirits (sri) will be
enraged, there will be bloody wounds, and it will be inauspicious for the subject's own horses, for which reasons enchanted missiles (zor)
should be cast in order to set free the haunting spirits (bstan), and rites of aversion should be performed to avoid bloodshed.
Lastly, if the majority of household members have the numeric square Red Nine, the lifespan and prosperity will
diminish, for which reasons rites to attract prosperity, secure the lifespan and so forth should be undertaken.
Furthermore, if the majority of household members have an element hostile to their vitality or destiny elements
coinciding with a sector of growth, and the majority also have a red numeric square, it will be dangerous for cattle (also shown on Plate
18, fig. 6). If the majority have the numeric square Black Two, but one has the numeric square White One, the prediction is that a 'wolf
will arise from behind a cairn' (mtho-yor phag-nas spyang-ki langs); and if a majority have one of the three white numeric squares but one
has the numeric square Black Two, the prediction is that bones will emerge from butter'. In all such negative cases, the rituals appropri-
ate to the numeric square in question should be undertaken.



242
The White Beryl
V
EYE
སྐྱེ་བ་སྤྱིའི་ཁ་དམའི་འབྲས་བུ།
au
Plate 18, fig. 6
TOONIG
dynus
Vyno
SK
.
A
Plate 18, fig. 6 (Ms II: ff. 11-15): General predicted results associated with the numeric squares (rme-ba spyi'i kha-dmar 'bras-bu; White Beryl, ff. 2676-268a)
If the majority of White 1
White 1, 6 or 8
Black 2
Blue 3
Green 4
Yellow5
Yellow 5
Red 7
Red
Red 9
household members
A red numeric square
conjoined with an ele-
ment hostile to their vitality
Black Two, but one family White One, Six or Eight,
member has the numeric but one family member
Square White One has the numeric square
Black Two 49
have the following
numeric square
or destiny elements
(mang-tshogs ming)
coinciding with a sector
of growth (rdo-rje chag-
pa gYung-drung chag-pa) 48
it will be dangerous
for cattle.
the predicted result
death will ensue even if
the ancestral male gods
there will be disruptions
the spirit lords of the soil
serpentine spirits and
there will be afflictions
hostile treacherous
the lifespan and
the prediction is that
the prediction is that bones
is as follows
untimely, there will be
will vanish into space, at
and unwarranted ailments will become displeased,
spirit lords of the soil will
due to king spirits and
spirits (sr) will be
prosperity will diminish,
a wolf will arise from
will emerge from butter'.
('bras-bu)
ailments due to gods
which time one should
due to the 'upper demons' and there will be the risk
be displeased, causing
bewitchers, losses, bile
enraged, there will be
for which reasons rites
behind a cairn (mtho-
to attract prosperity,
yor phag-nas
spyng-ki langs).
secure the lifespan
because demons of the air ritually dispel the
and ground will haunt the bewildering gods who
sap of trees, and there will come in pursuit.
be contagious pestilences,
(ya-bdud), it will be of sufferings due to
inauspicious for servants, avalanches, fractured
horses, dogs and cattle, skulls, and hostile forces
there will be divorce and arising, for which reasons
the break up of the family the gTsug-gtor dkar-nag
home, for which reasons Dhāraṇīshould be
and so forth should
their respective ailments, diseases, and afflictions
includng dropsy, while due to curses and evil
diseases will also be spirits, for which reasons
caused by the conjunction the rgyal-mdos and
of hostile fire and water khrag-mdos thread-
elements.
crosses should be made,
bloody wounds, and it
will be inauspicious for
the subject's own
horses, for which
be undertaken.
for which reasons
reasons enchanted
impurities should be
missiles (zon) should
avoided.
white soil should be
recited, and the nag-pom
be cast to set free the
and no enmity should be
borne against Buddhist
scattered in the house,
haunting spirits (btsan)
go-gsum (gtor-ma]
offering should be made.
votive stūpas should be
monks or Bon priests.
and rites of aversion
built, the Prajñāpāramitā
should be performed
Sūtras should be recited,
to avoid bloodshed.
and offerings made to the
monastic community and
to beings trapped in lower
destinies.
Also on this point, as depicted on both Plate 9, fig. 12, and Supplementary Plate 18, fig. 7: if the majority of the household members have
White One, Six or Eight as their numeric square, rites of reparation and confession in the form of prayers to the gods and cleansing of
poison should be undertaken because there is the risk of divine punishment descending from the heavens and of infectious diseases (yams-
nad). If Black Two and Blue Three are in the majority, the bdun-mdos thread-cross should be made and rites performed to avert multiple
evils (ngan-dgu) and thus counteract death wishes, and misfortunes or sufferings due to the ‘upper demons' (ya-bdud). If Green Four is in
the majority, rituals to appease the serpentine spirits, imprecatory goddesses or lake-dwelling mermaids (mtsho-sman) should be per-
formed to counteract the influence of the displeased spirit lords of the soil and plague-causing spirits (gnyan). If Yellow Five is in the
majority, rgyal-mdos and khrag-mdos thread-crosses should be made to counteract the deep-set afflictions of the king spirits and bewitch-
ers (rgyal-'gong), which bring losses, bile disorders, infectious diseases and curses. If Red Seven or Nine are in the majority, rites that
appease the haunting spirits (btsan) should counteract the predicted haemorrhages. Lastly, if numeric squares in an enemy-relationship
with the destiny element are in a majority, and the corresponding body element is red, it will be inauspicious for cattle.



243
Divinations of obstacle years
Above Detail of Plate 18, fig. 6 (see opposite), showing the predictions
when a majority of household members have the numeric squares
Black Two or Blue Three
Plate 9, fig. 12 (Ms I:f. 40): Obstacles arising when the majority of family members in a single household have the following numeric squares (White Beryl, f. 268a)
If a majority of household members have
If a majority of household members have
If a majority of household members have
the numeric squares White 1, 6 or 8
the numeric squares Black 2 and Blue 3
the numeric square Green 4
If a majority of household members have
If a majority of household members have
If a majority of household members have
the numeric squares Red 9 and 7
the numeric square Yellow 5
the numeric squares Red 7 and 9
rituals which appease the haunting spirits (btsan)
it will be inauspicious for cattle.
rites of fulfilment and reparation in the form of
prayers to the gods and cleansing of poison should
be undertaken to counteract divine punishment
specified rituals should be performed to counteract
death wishes, and misfortunes or sufferings due to
the 'upper demons' (ya-bdud).
rituals should be performed to counteract the
influence of the spirit lords of the soil and plague-
rites should be performed to counteract the deep-
set afflictions of the king-spirits and bewitchers
(rgyal-'gong), which bring bile disorders and
should counteract the predicted haemorrhages.
causing spirits (gnyan).
descending from the heavens and the infectious
infectious diseases.
disease of the gods.
Plate 9, fig. 12
en
ze



244
The White Beryl
ད་བྱས་ན
OVERSEC
Plate 18, fig. 7
otuuttaa
Plate 18, fig. 7 (Ms II: ff. 11-15): Predicted results based on association with a specific class of numeric square (White Beryl, f. 268a)
If the majority of the household members White 1, 6 and 850
Black 2 and Blue 3
have the following numeric square
Green 4
Yellow 5
Red 7 and 9
A numeric square in an enemy-relationship
with the destiny element (gYung-drung
classes (mang-tshogs)
zhig-pa), conjoined with a corresponding
red body element
it will be inauspicious for cattle.
there are the following predicted results
('bras-bu)
rituals to appease the serpentine spirits,
imprecatory goddesses or lake-dwelling
mermaids (mtsho-sman) should be
rgyal-mdos and khrag-mdos thread-crosses
should be made to counteract the deep-set
afflictions of the king-spirits and bewitchers
rites which appease the haunting spirits
(btsan) should counteract the predicted
haemorrhages.
rites of fulfilment and reparation in the form the bdun-mdos thread-cross should be
of prayers to the gods and cleansing of poison made and rites performed to avert multiple
should be undertaken because there is the evils (ngan-dgu) and thus counteract death
risk of divine punishment descending from wishes and misfortunes or sufferings due to
the heavens and the infectious disease of the upper demons' (ya-bdud).
the gods.
performed to counteract the influence of the
(rgyal-'gong, which bring losses, bile
displeased spirit lords of the soil and
disorders, infectious diseases, and curses.
plague-causing spirits (gnyan).
SU
BE
SAN
GEN
ARASINDA
ENGERS
WAR
SONRW
VES
CS
SA
NA
si
MES
FA
2
*
UN
STARS
NE
WW



245
Divinations of obstacle years
Above Detail of Plate 18, fig. 8, showing the widows and Buddhist
monks who are afflicted due to the conjunction of Black Two with
Green Four and Yellow Five
Furthermore, as indicated on Supplementary Plate 18, fig. 8, there are distinctive predictions when Black Two is present along with each
of the nine numeric squares. For example, when Black Two is present alongside White One, the prediction is directed against small boys;
when it is present alongside Black Two, adult males will be afflicted; when it is present alongside Blue Three, children or disabled per-
sons will be afflicted; when it is present alongside Green Four, widows will be afflicted; when it is present alongside Yellow Five,
Buddhist monks will be afflicted; when it is present alongside White Six, Bon priests will be afflicted; when it is present alongside Red
Seven, women will be afflicted; when it is present alongside White Eight, the protector Zhang-blon will be afflicted; and when it is
present alongside Red Nine, kings or the aged (btsad-po/rgan-rgon) will be afflicted. Under such circumstances appropriate counteracting
rituals should be undertaken.
Opposite Detail of Plate 18, fig. 7, showing the predictions when a
majority of household members have the numeric square Green Four
Gardry
Plate 18, fig. 8
White 6
Red 7
White 8
Red 9
Plate 18, fig. 8 (Ms II: ff. 11-15): Types of person afflicted when Black Two is present alongside other numeric squares (White Beryl, f. 268a)
When Black Two is present alongside the White 1 Black 2 Blue 3 Green 4
Yellow 5
following numeric square (sme-ba nag-rigs)
the following types are afflicted (mi-rigs) small boys adult males disabled widows Buddhist
persons
monks
Bon priests
women
protector
kings or the aged
(btsad-po/rgan-
Zhang-blon
or children
rgon)



246
The White Beryl
Four pebbles representing minor obstacles arising from the numeric squares (White Beryl, f. 268a/b)
One pebble is placed representing obstacles to buildings (khang-keg), which are determined on the basis of the numeric square of the pres-
ent year. Specific rituals and recitations are prescribed in the event of obstacles arising to interrupt building projects or restoration
works, or to cause cerebral diseases.
A second pebble is placed representing obstacles to bedding (mal-keg),51 which are determined on the basis of the
subject's natal numeric square. For example, if a subject with a white natal numeric square encounters a year governed by a white
numeric square, there is the risk of conflicts and personal malevolent forces (rang-bdud), and if the subject is a woman, of affliction due to
king spirits and bewitchers (rgyal-'gong). If a subject with a black natal numeric square encounters a year governed by a black numeric
square, there will be affliction due to male malevolent forces (pho-bdud). If a subject with a blue natal numeric square encounters a year
governed by a blue numeric square, there will be drought and ailments due to gods and demons (lha-'dre). If a subject with a green natal
numeric square encounters a year governed by a green numeric square, there will be afflictions due to pollution when wood is cut or due
to the serpentine spirit kings at dawn, and these will particularly affect the old and the very young. If a subject with a yellow natal
numeric square encounters a year governed by a yellow numeric square, there will be afflictions due to plague-causing spirits (gnyan) and
spirit lords of the soil coincident with building projects; and if a subject with a red natal numeric square encounters a year governed by a
red numeric square, there will be quarrels and women should avoid red-coloured beverages during menstruation.
A third pebble is placed representing environmental obstacles (yul-keg), which are determined on the basis of
Black Two. Different readings are given depending on whether only one spouse has Black Two or whether they both have it. In the for-
mer case, sudden ailments and primordial bewitchers (ye-'brog) may afflict the old and the young, while the latter portends more severe
outcomes including fatality.
Lastly, a fourth pebble is placed representing the obstacle known as the 'kingly gate of the elements, which is
Below Detail of Plate 18, fig. 9 (see opposite), showing environmental
determined on the basis of the enemy aspects of the subject's natal numeric square, as in the encounter of fire and iron. Chart 6.5 is exem-
plary, once again utilising the model of a subject born in the fire dragon year facing obstacles in the earth tiger year.
obstacles caused by the presence of Black Two
SA28
SPE
E
23
139
38
See
BORSE
SOM



247
Divinations of obstacle years
Exemplary chart 6.5
Four pebbles representing minor obstacles arising from the numeric squares (sme-ba'i keg-phran-gyi rde'u)
obstacles to buildings (khang-keg)
obstacles to bedding (mal-keg)
environmental obstacles (yul-keg)
obstacle known as the 'kingly gate of the elements' (khams-kyi rgyal-sgo 'gags-pa)
There are also two types of particularly great risk pertaining to the identification of these four obstacles. One occurs when a subject with
a red natal numeric square alights on a black current numeric square, and this is exemplified by sparks of fire leaping onto water; and the
other when a subject with a black natal numeric square alights on a red current numeric square, exemplified by water or iron backing
onto fire. The ritual remedy should correspond to the specific type of impediment.
This topic is depicted on Supplementary Plate 18, fig. 9, and summarised by Lo-chen Dharmaśrī in the following
verses (Moonbeams, f. 29a):
There are four pebbles representing minor obstacles arising from the numeric squares,
These represent: obstacles to buildings,
Determined by the numeric square of the present year;
Obstacles to bedding, determined by the [subject's] own natal numeric square;
Environmental obstacles, determined by the numeric square Black Two;
And the obstacles known as the 'kingly gate of the elements',
Which coincides with the enemy aspect of [the subject's] own natal numeric square.
Black pebbles should be deployed if [the year] coincides with those (obstacles),
And white ones if the inverse is the case.
a garinnararaan
zuia raast
ܙܢܙܘܘܙܘܐܐܢܙܘ
Glaze
Plate 18, fig. 9
5urtarsgraan
jarriquidontogar
Plate 18, fig. 9 (Ms II: ff. 11-15): Four pebbles representing minor obstacles arising from the numeric squares (White Beryl, f. 268a/b)
Basis of recognition (ngos-'dzin)
numeric square of the present year
the subject's natal numeric square
coincidence of Black 2
the enemy aspect of the subject's natal
The risk pertaining to these obstacles when
The risk pertaining to these obstacles when
a subject with a red natal numeric square
(gnam-lo'i rmer-babs)
(skyes-rmer babs)
(gnyis-nag babs)
numeric square (skyes-rme'i dgra-babs)
a subject with a black natal numeric square
alights on a red numeric square
alights on a black numeric square
(dmar-nas nag-phyin)
is exemplified by sparks of fire leaping
obstacles to bedding
environmental obstacles
Names and forms of the corresponding
four obstacles (skeg-bzhi'i ming-gzugs)
obstacles to buildings
(khang-keg)
obstacle known as the 'kingly gate of the
elements' ('byung-ba'i rgyal-sgo)
(nag-thon dmar-phyin)
is exemplified by water or iron
backing onto fire
(mal-keg)
(yul-keg)
onto water
Finally, one should note, as depicted on Supplementary Plate 18, fig. 10, that in general, and for males in particular, the heavenly gate
numeric square is Black Two and the earthly gate numeric square is White Six; while for females specifically, the heavenly gate numeric
square is White One and the earthly gate numeric square is Green Four.



248
The White Beryl
Hat qasrala
tangan
alakong
nilai
जवानGrat
Na
Gão as
(ar
नाagrat
Plate 18, fig. 10
Plate 18, fig. 10 (Ms II: ff. 11-15): Numeric squares representing the heavenly and earthly gates (White Beryl, f. 268b)
General heavenly and earthly gates
Heavenly and earthly gates for males
(spyi'i gnam-sgo sa-sgo)
(pho'i gnam-sgo sa-sgo)
Heavenly and earthly gates for females
(mo'i gnam-sgo sa-sgo)
White 1
Green 4
Black 2
White 6
Black 2
White 6
the heavenly gate is exposed
the earthly gate is rent
the heavenly gate is exposed
the earthly gate is rent
the heavenly gate is exposed
(gnam-sgo bye-ba)
the earthly gate is rent
(sa-sgo ral-ba)
(gnam-sgo bye-ba)
(sa-sgo ral-ba)
(gnam-sgo bye-ba)
(sa-sgo ral-ba)
Secret divination of the sectors of growth
and decline (White Beryl, ff. 268b-269a)
Here, the six auspicious and six inauspicious sectors of growth and decline are calculated in relation to the four aspects of vitality, body,
destiny and luck. When any given aspect is in decline or in an enemy-relationship, there are negative portents if the element in an enemy-
relationship to that of a male or female subject coincides with a specific current trigram and a specific numeric square. Some of the conse-
quent negative results for certain model years are indicated on Plate 9, fig. 14, unusually in greater detail than the description given in
White Beryl.52 For example, when the vitality aspect is in decline (srog-gud), there is the risk of fatality, requiring the performance of long-
life rituals. When the body aspect is in decline (lus-gud), there may be painful wounds and the risk of severe tumours (srang-lo). When the
destiny aspect is in decline (dbang-gud), there may be loss of wealth and riding horses will die ('og-rta 'chi), children will be hard to raise
and one will be subjected to theft. When the luck aspect is in decline (klung-gud), there will be false accusations, and the mighty will fall to
lowly positions and sweep the roads.
Plate 9, fig. 14 (Ms I. ff. 39–41): Secret divination of the sectors of growth and decline (gsang-ba dar-gud; White Beryl, ff. 268b-269a)
If the following
luck aspect in enemy body aspect in decline body aspect in enemy luck aspect in decline
inauspicious aspects relationship (klung-dgra) (lus-gud)
relationship (lus-dgra) (klung-gud)
body aspect in enemy-
mother's luck aspect
coinciding with multiples of
destiny aspect in enemy-
relationship (dbang-dgra)
body aspect in enemy-
relationship (lus-dgra)
body aspect in enemy-
relationship (lus-dgra)
destiny aspect in enemy-
relationship (dbang-dgra)
relationship (lus-dgra)
are present
nine (ma-klung dgu-mig)
in the case of the
wood mouse
water dragon
fire tiger
wood snake
earth snake
water monkey
iron ox
wood tiger
water dog
fire mouse
following model years
(dpe-na-mtshon-gyi lo)
male or female
male or female
male or female
male or female
male or female
head of the household
male or female
male
female
female
and the subject's sex
(mi-rigs) is
(bza'-dpon khyim sna-pa)
with the element forming
iron
fire
wood
earth
mother's luck aspect
earth
wood
fire
earth
water
coinciding with many
an enemy relationship
(dgra-gzugs) being
multiples of nine (ma-klung
dgu-mig mang-ba) 53
Li (male) or Khen (female)
while their current trigrams
Li (male) or Kham (female)
Gin (male) or Zon (female)
Dva (male) or Khon (female) Zin (male) or Dva (female)
Gin (male) or Zon (female)
Khon (male) or
Khon or Kham
Khon or Kham
Dva
(babs-spar) are
Kham (female)
and the current numeric
Black 2
Red 9
Red 7
Red 7/9
Black 2
White 6/8
Black 2/Blue 3
Black 2
Red 7
Red 7/9
squares (babs-sme) are
then the following results
are portended ('bras-bu)
bad reputation and
the subject will incur
blood will be spilled (dmar-
funeral rites will have to be
there will be loss of cattle
sorrows will arise
there will be widowhood
there will be widowhood
cattle will lose their calves
infectious diseases will
ensue (rims-nad
disputations will certainly
knife wounds
ngo khrag-ngo yod
(nor-phyugs-la god-
(mya-ngan 'khor)
(yugs-sa 'bab)
(yugs-sa 'bab)
(mdzo-sogs-kyi be'u 'chor)
performed (ro'i lag-len
byed-dgos)
dal-yams 'babs)
(mi de gri-ngo yod)
kha-yod
ensue (kha-smras kha-
mchu nges-par 'babs)
Most secret divination of the hours
coinciding with the destiny element
As stated above, 54 White Beryl identifies the calculation of the hour with the time at which the divination takes place. No further elucida-
tion is given at this point, and reference must be made to Chapter Thirty, which is entitled Impact of the Hour of Divination.55
Calculating the multiples of nine and the
tomb-signs (White Beryl, ff. 269a-273b)
Two crucial pebbles are then cast to represent the calculations pertaining to the tomb-signs and the multiples of number nine, as shown
in chart 6.6, once again using the example of a subject of the fire dragon year in the earth tiger year.
Exemplary chart 6.6
Calculation of the multiples of nine and the tomb-sign (dgu-mig dur-mig)
multiples of nine based on the subject's trigram
multiples of nine based on the subject's numeric square
multiples of nine based on the subject's year-sign
tomb-sign based on the subject's trigram



949
Divinations of obstacle years
This topic is summarised by Lo-chen Dharmaśrī in the following short verse (Moonbeams, f. 29a):
Thereafter, [as for the two pebbles representing
the multiple of nine and the tomb-sign]，
One black pebble should be deployed
If the multiple of nine aspect
Corresponding to the years, trigrams and numeric squares is present,
And another if the tomb-sign aspect of the trigams is present,
Or else white pebbles should be deployed respectively if these are not present.
Plate 9, fig. 14
ཀླུང་དགྲ།
།
༧ ལསན།
ལ ལས་ག་
༧ཀངགང *མཀླུང་རིག་མིག ༧དབང་དག་
༧ ལུས་ངག་*ལུས་ངག་ ལུས་ངག་ ་དབང་དགྲ་
བའི་དཔ
༧ མི་རིགས་
མོ་བུད་མེད།
5
ས་ལྷུང་དགུ་
བགསར་བ
འ དགྲ་གཟུགས་
བ བབས་སྤར་
1
བབས་ས་
ཁ་སྨས་ཁ་མཆུ། རིམས་ནད་དམ
དེས་པར་འབབས། ཡམས་འབབས་
སོང།
༢་ལག་ལེན ནོར་ཕྱོགས
བྱེད་དགོས། ལ་གོང་ཁ་
མྱ་ངན་འབོར་ ཡུགས་ས་ ། སུ ཤས་ས་མཚ སགས
འབབ་འབབ་ ཀྱི་བེའaཆོག
The tomb-sign
As already stated above, the trigram constituting the tomb-sign (dur-mig) will vary, depending on the subject's vitality element. For
example (Supplementary Plate 19, fig. 2), in the case of those with a wood vitality element, the tomb-sign coincides with the trigram
Khon, in the case of those with a fire vitality element it coincides with the trigram Khen, in the case of those with an iron vitality element
with the trigram Gin, and of those with an earth or water vitality element with the trigram Zon. 56
དུར་མང་བའི་སྐོར་འགོ་
dན་པར་
Plate 19, fig. 2
Plate 19, fig. 2 (Ms II: ff. 16–18): Computational chart of the tomb-sign (White Beryl, f. 270a)
Computational chart of the tomb-sign (dur-mig-gi skor-'go)
The following year-sign (10)
tiger or hare
coincides with the following current trigram (bab-spar) Khon
horse or snake
bird or monkey
mouse, pig, ox, sheep, dog or dragon
Zon
Khen
Gin
The multiples of nine
Prognostications based on the multiples of nine (dgu-mig) are more complex in that they may be made through one of five distinct meth-
ods of calculation. These are respectively based on a solitary sign (rkyang-pa), on combined signs (sbrags-ma), on trigrams (spar), on
numeric squares (sme-ba) or on constitutional types (rus-khams). The negative portents resulting from such calculations each have their
distinctive rites of reparation.
Calculating the multiples of nine on the basis of a solitary sign
Here, the calculation has six aspects. There is a particular computational sequence for male subjects (pho-bskor), and one for female sub-
jects (mo-bskor), on the basis of which the most dangerous multiples of nine (mtshang-chen) are identified, along with the crucial combina-
tions of the multiples of nine with the tomb-signs ('dom-gnad), the portents for households when childbirth coincides with multiples of
nine (skyes-mtshang gnad-kyi mig), and the multiples of nine in association with the eight elements (khams-brgyad mig).



250
The White Beryl
1. Computational sequence for male subjects
The computational sequence for male subjects is depicted on Plate 9, fig. 3. In the case of a male subject, the count begins from the mouse
sign, combined with whichever of the five destiny elements is appropriate. Thus, the first multiple of nine coincides with age nine, the
dragon year, and the trigram Li, which is inauspicious for young children, portending that a child may fall from the parent's lap. The sec-
ond multiple of nine coincides with age eighteen, the sheep year, and the trigram Khon, which indicates diminution of luck, portending
that adult males may incur painful knife wounds. The third multiple of nine coincides with the age twenty-seven, the dog year, and the
trigram Dva, portending loss of wealth, the ingress of primordial bewitchers (ye-'brog) and armed brigands stealing one's resources. The
fourth multiple of nine coincides with the age thirty-six, the ox year, and the trigram Khen, portending that the ghosts of murder victims
(gre-bo) will cause pollution and calumny. The fifth multiple of nine coincides with the age forty-five, the dragon year, and the trigram
Kham, portending diseases due to hostile gods (dgra-lha), pollution and poisoning, like a lion immersed in a water hole' (seng-ge chu-dong
tshud-pa). The sixth multiple of nine coincides with the age fifty-four, the sheep year, and the trigram Gin, portending unpredictable dis-
eases due to the gods, as if a 'stone sheep were sighing' (rdo-lug 'khun), and loss of life (shi-chad). The seventh multiple of nine coincides
with the age sixty-three, the dog year, and the trigram Zin, portending painful spasms, a time resembling the tearing of celestial trousers
on the ground' (gnam-gyi dor-ma dag-sar ral). The eighth multiple of nine coincides with the age seventy-two, the ox year, and the tri-
gram Zon, portending madness and hostilities. Lastly, the ninth multiple of nine coincides with the age eighty-one, the dragon year, and
the trigram Li, portending haemorrhages and infectious diseases.
2. Computational sequence for female subjects
The computational sequence for female subjects is similarly depicted on Plate 9, fig. 3. In the case of a female subject, the count begins
from the bird sign, combined with whichever of the five destiny elements is appropriate. Thus, the first multiple of nine coincides with
age nine, the ox year, and the trigram Kham, portending that it is as if the string of a turquoise necklace breaks and there will be life-
threatening plagues. The second multiple of nine coincides with age eighteen, the dragon year, and the trigram Khen, portending the
possible death of a son, the aggravation of king spirits and devouring demons (za-'dre), and accidents due to riding, falling or knives. The
third multiple of nine coincides with age twenty-seven, the sheep year, and the trigram Dva, portending painful diseases, pollution and
sterility. The fourth multiple of nine coincides with age thirty-six, the dog year, and the trigram Khon, portending weeping due to an
iron female wolf, life-threatening skin diseases, and sufferings. The fifth multiple of nine coincides with age forty-five, the ox year, and
the trigram Li, portending that if an old woman is confronted by spirit lords of the soil in a confined place, they should be cut off, or else
there could be fatal knife wounds, avalanches, infant mortality, or miscarriages ('jur-gtong). The sixth multiple of nine coincides with age
fifty-four, the dragon year, and the trigram Zon, portending infectious diseases, disputations and menstrual problems. The seventh
multiple of nine coincides with age sixty-three, the sheep year, and the trigram Zin, portending lameness, rheumatism, muscular
spasms, and the possible death of the mistress of the house due to a knife accident. The eighth multiple of nine coincides with age seventy-
two, the dog year, and the trigram Gin, portending diseases due to spirit lords of the soil, the falling down of a child to the ground, and
the fatality of a newly born boy. Lastly, the ninth multiple of nine coincides with age eighty-one, the ox year, and the trigram Kham,
portending widowhood.
36
45
54
63
72
81
Plate 9, fig. 3 (Ms 1, ff. 37–38): Male and female computational charts for calculation of multiples of nine (White Beryl, f. 269a/b)
Age of subject
18
27
Year-sign coinciding with the fire dragon
fire sheep
earth dog
multiple of nine, a computational
chart for male subjects, starting
earth ox
water dragon
water sheep
water dog
water ox
wood dragon
from the wood mouse year
(dgu-mig-gi'u shing-byi dgu-
mig pho-skor)
Conjoined with the year-
trigram (lo-span)
Predicted result ('bras-bu)
Khon
Dva
Khen
Kham
Gin
Zin
Zon
diseases due to hostile gods
diseases due to the
madness and hostilities.
haemorrhages and infectious
inauspicious for young
children, symbolised by a
child falling from the lap.
diminution of luck, portending
that adult males may incur
loss of wealth, ingress of
primordial bewitchers (ye-
'brog) and armed brigands.
pollution and calumny due to
ghosts of murder victims
(gre-bo).
painful spasms, symbolised
by the rending of heaven.
diseases.
(dgra-lha), pollution and
poisoning, symbolised
painful knife wounds.
gods, and unpredictable
fatalities, symbolised by the
'sighing of a stone sheep'
(rdo-lug 'khun).
by a ‘lion immersed in
a water hole
fire ox
wood dragon
earth sheep
iron dog
iron ox
water pig
water mouse
wood dog
wood ox
Year-sign coinciding with the
multiple of nine, a computational
chart for female subjects,
starting from the wood bird year
(dgu-mig shing-bya mo-skor)
Conjoined with the year-
Kham
Khen
Dva
Khon.
Zon
Zin
Gin
Kham
trigram (lo-spar)
Predicted result ('bras-bu)
widowhood.
life-threatening plagues,
symbolised by the breaking
aggravation of king-spirits
and sterility.
infectious diseases, menstrual lameness, muscular spasms,
problems and disputations. rheumatism and the possible
diseases due to spirit lords of
the soil, and infant mortality
possible death of a son, the
aggravation of king-spirits
and devouring spirits (za-'dre),
and accidents due to riding,
life-threatening skin diseases, knife accidents, menstrual
sorrows and weeping, ailments, or loss of children
symbolised by iron grey wolf. occurring if an old woman is
confronted dangerously by
of a turquoise necklace.
death of the mistress of the
symbolised by the falling of
house due to a knife accident.
a child to the ground.
falling or knives.
spirit lords of the soil in
confined places



251
Divinations of obstacle years
Plate 9, fig. 3
DS
བྱ་དག་ཡིག་གི་
བྱི་རག་མིག་
༧ལི་སྤར་
LA
ལས་བ
༄༅།ངག་མག་
sienos
00000000000
3. Most dangerous multiples of nine (mtshang-chen dgu-mig)
On the basis of these computational sequences for men and women, the most dangerous ages coinciding with a multiple of nine may be
identified. It is said that for an old man the most dangerous multiple of nine coincides with the age of sixty-three, and for an adult male
eighteen (i.e. “the age at which an old dog dies'). Thirty-six is the most dangerous multiple of nine coinciding with enemies and loss of
land or home. Nine is the most dangerous multiple of nine for small children, fifty-four for old women, forty-five for adult women and
eighteen for young girls. If all these most dangerous years clash in the case of a single household it is important to undertake ritual acts to
counteract sorrows.
zur
4. Crucial combination of the multiples of nine with the tomb-signs ('dom-gnad)
gence of a multiple of nine with one of the tomb-signs may coincide with the present year or its seventh-removed bdun-zur
aspect, as stated above. This convergence occurs for men at the following ages: fifty-four for those born in the bird or monkey year
under Gin; seventy-two for those born in a mouse, pig, ox, sheep, dog or dragon year under Zon; eighteen for those born in a tiger or hare
year under Khon; and thirty-six for those born in a horse or snake year under Khen. For women the convergence occurs at the following
ages: eighteen for those born in a horse or snake year under Khen; thirty-six for those born in a tiger or hare year under Khon; fifty-
four for those born in a mouse, pig, ox, sheep, dragon or dog year under Zon; and seventy-two for those born in a bird or monkey year
under Gin.
5. Portents for households when childbirth coincides with the multiples of nine (skyes-mtshang gnad-kyi mig)
There are eight sorts of child whose birth coincides with a multiple of nine, as follows. A child born when the mother is aged eighteen
may portend continuous suffering. A child born when the mother is aged twenty-seven may portend accidental death for paternal rela-
tives. A child born when the mother is aged thirty-six may portend loss of kingship or authority. A child born when the mother is aged
forty-five may portend harsh outcomes for elderly paternal relatives. A child born when the mother is aged fifty-four may portend harsh
consequences for paternal relatives within three years. A child born when the mother is aged sixty-three may portend agitation of the
dagger of the lifespan (tshe-phur), bringing death through stab wounds. A child born when the mother is aged seventy-two may portend
afflictions due to spirit lords of the soil. Lastly, a child born when the mother is aged eighty-one may portend that the paternal relatives
will be swept away.
6. Multiples of nine in association with the eight elements (khams-brgyad mig)
When a multiple of nine coincides with one or other of the eight elements governing the eight trigrams, there are diverse portents,
as illustrated on Plate 9, fig. 5. For example, a multiple of nine in association with the wood element, and coinciding with the trigram
Zin and the ox, dragon, sheep or dog year, portends that primordial bewitchers (ye-'brog) will suddenly ingress, having a fatal
impact. Similarly, a multiple of nine in association with the fire element, and coinciding with the trigram Li and the bird or monkey year,



252
The White Beryl
portends that loss of weight (skam-nad) and infectious disease may have a fatal impact. A multiple of nine in association with the earth
element, and coinciding with the trigrams Khen, Khon, Zon or Gin, and the hare or pig year, portends that asphyxia ('thibs-nad) and
obesity may have a fatal impact. A multiple of nine in association with the iron element, and coinciding with the trigram Dva and the
tiger or hare year, portends that blood feuds and knives may have a fatal impact. Then, a multiple of nine in association with the
water element, and coinciding with the trigram Kham and the horse or snake year, portends that there may be water ailments and
serum disorders having a fatal impact.
Now, the weight of these coincidences of multiples of nine may have a life-reducing impact (rgya-ma 'theng) or a
potentially fatal impact (rgya-ma sdod). For example, in the case of someone with a wood constitutional type, the year of life-reducing
impact is the wood sheep, and the year of potentially fatal impact is the wood dog. In the case of someone with a fire constitutional type,
the year of life-reducing impact is the fire dog, and the year of potentially fatal impact is the fire ox. In the case of someone with an earth
constitutional type, the year of life-reducing impact is the earth dragon, and the year of potentially fatal impact is the earth sheep. In the
case of someone with an iron constitutional type, the year of life-reducing impact is the iron ox, and the year of potentially fatal impact is
the iron dragon. Lastly, in the case of someone with a water constitutional type, the year of life-reducing impact is the water dragon, and
the year of potentially fatal impact is the water sheep.
ཁམས་བརྒྱ་དག་
མིག་སྤང།
།བ་བྱའིལ།
འབསབ།
བུར་ཡོའབྲུག་སྤྱོད་སྙམ་ནད་ཡམས་ནད་
ཐབས་ད་ལྡནད་སྔར ས་གྲར་སྟོདTཙུནར་ནསེར་
haskar
EVAT
D)
། སྡེད་ལ། །
Plate 9, fig. 5
Dva
Kham
Plate 9, fig. 5 (Ms I, ff. 37–38): Calculation of the multiples of number nine associated with the eight elements (White Beryl, f. 270a/b)
When the multiple of nine Zin
Khon, Khen, Gin or Zon
coincides with the following
trigrams indicative of the
eight elements (khams
brgyad-dgu mig-spar)
and the subject's year-sign
ox, sheep, dog or dragon
bird or monkey
mouse or pig
tiger or hare
horse or snake
(brtsi-bya'i lo) is
the following result is
predicted ('bras-bu)
primordial bewitchers will
loss of weight and infectious
pollution and knives may have
there may be water ailments
disease may have a fatal impact
asphyxia and obesity may have
a fatal impact (thibs-nad
Ici-nad sdod)
a fatal impact (sme-grir sdod)
suddenly ingress, having
a potentially fatal impact
and serum disorders, having
(skam-nad yams-nad sdod)
a fatal impact (chu-nad chu-
(blo-bur ye-'brog sdod)
ser sdod
wood
fire
earth
iron
water
When the multiple of nine
suggests the weight of past
actions for one with the
following constitutional
types (rgya-ma steng-sngo
dgu-mig rus)
the year of life-reducing
wood sheep
fire dog
earth dragon
iron ox
water dragon
impact (thengs-lo) is
and the year of potentially
fatal impact is (sdod-lo)
wood dog
fire ox
earth sheep
iron dragon
water sheep
Calculating the multiples of nine based on combined signs (sbrags-ma)
Here the calculation is made on the basis of the so-called four opening keys ('byed-pa'i lde-mig, Plate 9, fig. 13). In the case of those with an
ox, dragon, sheep, dog, mouse or pig natal sign, the calculation begins from the wood mouse year, in the case of those with a tiger or hare
natal sign it begins from the fire hare year, in the case of those with a snake or horse natal sign it begins from the iron horse year, and in
the case of those with a monkey or bird natal sign it begins from the water bird year. Then, after counting backwards for the number cor-
responding to the subject's age, one arrives at the successive tomb-sign aspects, which coincide with the ages of nine, twenty-one, thirty-
three, forty-five, fifty-seven, sixty-nine and eighty-one.57 In addition to the eighty tomb-sign aspects which may be calculated through
these four opening keys and which have already been outlined,58 there are two important rnga-zor calculations which can also be made.59
The first, known as the multiple of nine conjoined with the rnga-zor calculation (rnga-zor dgu-mig), is arrived at by counting five signs
backwards or forwards from a given multiple of nine/tomb-sign convergence. These are deemed inauspicious, the preceding rnga-zor



253
Divinations of obstacle years
sign being described as a butcher and the following rnga-zor sign as a pit. If the subject is a very important person (gtso-bo), it will be
harsh for the environment; if the subject is male, the portents will be harsh for women and vice versa; and if the subject is an old person, it
will be harsh for children and vice versa.
The second, known as the rnga-zor calculation corresponding to nativity luck (btsas-klungs mig), requires the
diviner to count forwards three to five places from the parent's natal sign, and examine these year-signs in conjunction with the subject's
identical destiny element. These calculations are depicted on Plate 9, fig. 4. For example, if one with a wood constitutional type born in a
tiger or hare year gives birth in the wood snake year, it will resemble a bird hopping with a broken wing and sudden diseases will emerge.
If the child is born in the wood horse year, however, it will resemble a frog-shaped turquoise turning up at a crossroads, and there will be
loss of wealth. If the child is born in the wood sheep year the infant child of a celestial goddess (gnam-gyi sman-mo)6° will die, and it will be
generally inauspicious for small children.
If one with a fire constitutional type born in a horse or snake year gives birth to a child in the fire monkey year,
there will be lice indicating that the lifespan is exhausted. If the child is born in the fire bird year, a bse-stone6l bowl will be unable to con-
tain poison; and if the child is born in the fire dog year, it will be harsh for paternal relatives, as if penetrated by the arrow of a strongman.
If one with an earth or water constitutional type born in an ox, sheep, dog, dragon, pig or mouse year gives birth
to a child in the water tiger year, it suggests that a turquoise saddle could break and it will be harsh for elder brothers. If the child is born
in the water hare year it will be harsh for younger brothers; and if the child is born in the water dragon year, it will be harsh for grandchil-
dren and sons-in-law (tsha-mag).
If one with an iron constitutional type born in a bird or monkey year gives birth to a child in the iron pig year, it
will be as if iron rocks are rolling down onto an egg. If the child is born in the iron mouse year, it will resemble a time when a tiger is killed
by a brave, and there may be sudden diseases, enemies, or sudden death. If the child is born in the iron ox year, it will be a time when the
ground below is subverted by grey wolves, and castles are lost to enemies.
Plate 9, fig. 4 (Ms I: ff. 37–38): Prognostications concerning nativity luck for those born in rnga-zor years (White Beryl, f. 271a/b)
As for the luck of those born in wood tiger or hare
fire horse or snake
earth ox, sheep, dog, or dragon;
iron bird or monkey
rnga-zor years, if parents have the
and water pig or mouse
following year-signs (rnga-zor
btsas klungs-kyi pha-ma'i lo)
and the child is born in the following
year, the result will be (bu-tsha
lo-dang de'i 'bras-bu)
fire monkey
wood tiger
iron pig
wood snake
It will resemble a bird hopping with a
There will be lice indicating that the
It will be harsh for elder brothers,
It will be as if iron rocks are rolling down
broken wing, and sudden diseases
lifespan is exhausted.
symbolised by the breaking of a
onto an egg.
will emerge.
turquoise saddle.
fire bird
wood hare
iron mouse
But if the child is born in the following wood horse
year, the result will be (bu-tsha There will be loss of wealth, symbolised
It will resemble a bse-stone bowl which
it will be harsh for younger brothers.
There may be sudden diseases, enemies,
lo-dang de'i 'bras-bu)
is unable to contain poison.
or sudden death, symbolised by a tiger
by a frog-shaped turquoise turning up
at a crossroads.
slain by a brave.
water dragon
iron ox
and if the child is born in the following wood sheep
fire dog
year, the result will be (bu-tsha The child of a celestial sman-mo spirit will It will be harsh for paternal relatives, as if
lo-dang de'i 'bras-bu)
die, and it will generally be inauspicious penetrated by the arrow of a strongman.
It will be harsh for grandchildren
and sons-in-law.
It will be a time when land and estates are
lost to enemies, symbolised by the insidious
for small children.
subversion of grey wolves.
Plate 9, fig. 4
911 IAN
JERRY
།ཟུརྩེའི་ལ་དང་
པའིའབྲས་བུ།
མི་འབྲས་བུ།།
དབུ་ཚེའི་ལོ་དང་།
དེའི་འབྲས་བུ།
Calculating the multiples of nine based on the trigrams
(spar-kha'i dgu-mig)
In this case, the calculations begin from the Li trigram in the case of males and from the Kham trigram in the case of females, and the
count is juxtaposed with the multiples of nine until the appropriate trigrams are obtained.
Calculating the multiples of nine based on the numeric squares
(sme-ba'i dgu-mig)
Here the calculation begins from the subject’s natal numeric square (skyes-sme). It is said that if a child's natal numeric square is Black
Two and the calculation alights on White One, there will be pollution and avalanches, requiring the recitation of rites of reparation and
confession (bskang-bshags). If the natal numeric square of a woman is Blue Three and the calculation alights on Black Two, there will be



254
The White Beryl
bad omens. If the natal numeric square of a Bon priest is Green Four, and the calculation alights on Blue Three, there will be quarrels, ill-
health and bad reputation. If the natal numeric square of a Buddhist is Yellow Five and the calculation alights on White Six, there will be
wounds and swellings. If the natal numeric square of a male is White Eight and the calculation alights on Red Seven, treacherous spirits
(sri) will arise and there will be bloodshed. Lastly, if the natal numeric square of a king or potentate is Red Nine and the calculation alights
on White Eight, there will be pollution, disputes and bad reputation.
Calculating the multiples of nine based on constitutional types
(rus-khams dgu-mig)
As in the case of the aforementioned combined calculation (sbrags-ma), the calculation of the multiple of nine here begins from the wood
mouse year in the case of those of an earth or water constitutional type, in the fire hare year for those of a wood constitutional type, in the
iron horse year for those of a fire constitutional type, and in the water bird year for those of an iron constitutional type. It is inauspicious if
when counting backwards, multiples of nine coincide with one of the tomb-signs.
The predictions given for each of these constitutional types are depicted on Plate 9, fig. 13. For example, in the
case of those of an earth or water constitutional type, when the calculation begins from the wood mouse sign, the first multiple of nine
(age nine), symbolised by afflictions due to demons, suggests that one will be oppressed by a tyrannical head of the family. The second
such multiple of nine (age twenty-one), symbolised by a clouded sun, suggests that primordial bewitchers (ye-'brog) will ingress. The
third (age thirty-three), symbolised by an enraged turquoise-coloured ox, suggests that infectious diseases or plagues will emerge. The
fourth (age forty-five), symbolised by the cracking of turquoise-coloured rocks, suggests that a male subject will be subjected to enemies
and theft. The fifth (age fifty-seven), symbolised by the falling of a golden branch, suggests it will be inauspicious for elderly paternal rel-
atives.
In the case of those of a wood constitutional type, when the calculation begins from the fire hare sign, the first
multiple of nine (age nine), symbolised by a bird alighting on the point of a spear (mdung-rtse-la-ni bya-chags dus), suggests that men will
fall into enemy hands. The second (age twenty-one), symbolised by the fighting of demons and humans, suggests that this will be inaus-
picious to the subject and the subject's circle of acquaintances. The third (age thirty-three), symbolised by arrows with broken shafts,
suggests it will be harsh for sons, grandsons and teachers. The fourth (age forty-five), symbolised by arrows penetrating underground,
suggests spirit lords of the soil will be aggravated, and it will be inauspicious for spiritual teachers and paternal relatives. The fifth (age
fifty-seven), symbolised by the falling of vultures to earth, suggests that there will be disputations.
In the case of those of a fire constitutional type, when the calculation begins from the iron horse sign, the first
multiple of nine (age nine), symbolised by demons wielding wooden slates and casting pebbles of death, suggests that it will be inauspi-
cious for disturbed persons. The second (age twenty-one), symbolised by afflictions due to Buddhist or Bon curses, suggests that virulent
diseases will suddenly emerge. The third (age thirty-three), symbolised by the falling of a child from the mother's lap, suggests there will
be virulent diseases in childhood. The fourth (age forty-five), symbolised by confrontation with enemies, suggests that hostile demons
should be suppressed. The fifth (age fifty-seven), symbolised by a broken arrow of vitality (srog-mda), suggests that the subject will be
prone to virulent diseases and there will be many disputations.
In the case of those of an iron constitutional type, when the calculation begins from the water bird sign, the
first multiple of nine (age nine), symbolised by the emergence of gold from underground, suggests that wealth will be exhausted.
Plate 9, fig. 13
A
G
C
CEERS
IR
C
LIGG
ENIX
WILSON
ACICA
ARVA
CHINA
E
SEVA
TOLT
ICE
SPRES
VE
AAF
TO
T
TU
UN
IN&T
(AASIALAN
ao



255
Divinations of obstacle years
The second (age twenty-one), symbolised by someone carrying a load, suggests that the subject will be judged alongside an enemy.
The third (age thirty-three), symbolised by the breaking of a golden plough, suggests that powerful persons will become hostile.
The fourth (age forty-five), symbolised by someone being lassoed by demons, suggests a harsh outcome for the subject's circle
of acquaintances. The fifth (age fifty-seven), symbolised by a tomb, suggests the risk of fatality to the subject or to his or her paternal
and maternal cousins, and a diminution of merit.
For each kind of constitutional type, the sixth (age sixty-nine) and the seventh (age eighty-one) multiple of nine
have portents identical to the first and second respectively. Various remedies and ritual means for counteracting each of these negative
prognoses are also indicated in the text.
at age 33
at age 57
Plate 9, fig. 13 (Ms I, ff. 39–41): Calculation of the multiples of number nine based on constitutional types (rus-khams dgu-mig; White Beryl, f. 272a/b)
Age of subject coinciding with tomb aspects Count begins
at age 9
at age 21
In the case of those of an earth or water the calculation begins from the
the subject will be oppressed by a tyrannical primordial bewitchers will ingress,
constitutional type
wood mouse year 62
head of the family, symbolised by afflictions symbolised by a clouded sun
due to demons
at age 45
men will be subjected to enemies and theft
infectious diseases or plagues will envelop,
it will be inauspicious for elderly paternal
symbolised by an enraged turquoise-
symbolised by the cracking of turquoise-
relatives, symbolised by the falling of a golden
coloured ox
coloured rocks
branch
In the case of those of a wood
the calculation begins from the
men will fall into enemy hands, symbolised
this will be inauspicious to oneself and one's
it will be harsh for sons, grandsons and
spirit lords of the soil will be aggravated,
there will be disputations, symbolised by the
constitutional type
fire hare year
by a bird alighting on the point of a spear
circle, symbolised by the fighting of demons
teachers, symbolised by arrows with
and it will be inauspicious for spiritual
falling of vultures to earth
and humans
broken shafts
teachers and paternal relatives, symbolised
by arrows penetrating underground
In the case of those of a fire
the calculation begins from the
it will be inauspicious for disturbed persons,
virulent diseases will suddenly emerge,
hostile demons should be suppressed,
there will be virulent diseases in childhood,
symbolised by the falling of a child from the
the person will be subject to virulent diseases
and there will be many disputations, symbolised
constitutional type
iron horse year
symbolised by afflictions due to Buddhist
symbolised by confrontation
symbolised by demons wielding wooden
slates and casting pebbles of death
mother's lap
with enemies
by a broken arrow of vitality
or Bon curses
one will be judged alongside an enemy,
In the case of those of an
the calculation begins from the
wealth will be exhausted, symbolised by
powerful persons will become hostile,
there will be a harsh outcome for the subject's
circle of acquaintances, symbolised by
there will be the risk of fatality to the subject or to
paternal or maternal cousins, and diminution of
iron constitutional type
water bird year
the emergence of gold from underground
symbolised by someone carrying a load
symbolised by the breaking of a
golden plough
someone being lassoed by demons
merit, exposure to virulent diseases and there
will be many disputations, symbolised by a tomb
Alternative methods of calculating obstacle years
In addition to this standard method for calculating obstacle years, various alternative methods have been mentioned in White Beryl and
in Moonbeams. These can be outlined as follows.
1. Utilising thirty-one or thirty-seven pebbles
According to this technique, there are thirty-one divinatory pebbles, comprising twenty-four pebbles that represent the contrast
between the six basic unchanging pebbles (symbolising the vitality, body, destiny, luck, trigram and numeric square of the present year)
and the subject's own vitality, body, destiny and luck elements; along with the four predictive pebbles,69 and three representing the
multiples of nine based on the trigram, numeric square and year. 64 Chart 6.7 is exemplary, once again utilising the example of a subject of
the fire dragon year during the earth tiger year.
6.7 Exemplary chart
Subject (brtsi-bya): fire dragon
vitality: earth
body: earth
destiny: fire
luck: wood
Present year (gnam-lo): earth tiger
vitality: wood
XX
0
body: earth
0 X
XX
0
O
ОХ
00
00
destiny: earth
0
luck: iron
ОХ
XX
XX
х
subject's current trigram: Zin
current numeric square: Red 7
predictive pebble
multiples of nine based on
the year (lo'i dgu-mig)
ОХ
0
ox
multiples of nine based
on the trigram (spar-
ох
0
x
multiples of nine based
0
0
0
on the numeric square
(sme-ba'i dgu-mig)
kha'i dgu-mig)
These may also be enumerated as thirty-seven, with the inclusion of the six basic pebbles. Lo-chen Dharmaśrī therefore states
(Moonbeams, f. 29b):
Then again, there is the divination [of obstacles]
And three representing the multiples of nine based on the trigram, numeric square (and year].
Associated with the course of a given year,
Thus, there are ascertained to be thirty-one (pebbles).
derived from the secret 'pointed-out' instructions. 65
Or thirty-seven with the further inclusion of the six basic pebbles.
[Here), there are thirty-one pebbles.
These comprise twenty-four pebbles representing the contrast
As for the result of such divinations:
Between the six basic pebbles symbolising
One should examine the Twenty-Verse Commentary on the Root Tantra (rtsa-ba'i 'grel-pa nyi-shu),
The vitality, body, destiny, luck, trigram and numeric square of the present year,
And the subject's own vitality, body, destiny and luck elements;
Along with the four predictive pebbles,
The dMar-ston sTag-mgo, the sGang-sgril and other texts;
And respect their [admonitions for] rectifying faults. 66



IlllMANN
AAAAAAAAN
U
res
S
CSSON
21
De
22
ESCO
co
Sa
ES
32



257
Divinations of obstacle years
2. The Chinese method of pebble distribution (rgya-nag rdel-skor)
This method may be employed to make divinations of obstacle years in respect of an entire family which has at least four members. Usually
five or six family members will be chosen. First, the pebbles of conclusive analysis must be established for each of the selected family mem-
bers. These represent the vitality, body, destiny, luck and numeric square elements of each person, contrasted with the corresponding
aspects of the present year. The pebbles are then arranged in order of gender (male – female) and seniority, with the body elements in the
upper row, the vitality elements in the second row and so on, down to the numeric square pebbles in the last row.67 Note that each of the
boxes thus formed is numbered distinctly: those in the row of the body elements in the sequence 1, 11, 21, 30, 20, 10; those in the row of the
vitality elements in the sequence 3, 13, 23, 28, 18, 8; those in the row of destiny elements in the sequence 5, 15, 25, 26, 16,6; those in the row
of luck elements in the sequence 7, 17, 27, 24, 14, 4; and those in the row of numeric squares in the sequence 9, 19, 29, 22, 12, 2.
Once these have been laid out, they are permutated in a particular sequence68 and then further rearranged within
four rows, known respectively as the divine', 'human', 'household' and 'enemy' sectors. The pebbles of the first and third rows are laid out
consecutively from left to right while those of the second and fourth rows are laid out in reverse from right to left. In the case of the exam-
ple given below, 1–7 occupy the first row, 24–30 occupy the second, 17–23 occupy the third, and 8–14 occupy the fourth. Any surplus or
residual pebbles (rdel-ro) that do not fit within the grid (i.e. 15 and 16 in the present example) are positioned to the right of the last col-
umn. This might be in the second row, in which case they are known as “residual pebbles of the second row' (khug-pa'i rdel-ro); in the third
row, in which case they are known as ‘residual pebbles of the third row' (yang-khug rdel-ro); or in the fourth row, in which case they are
known as ‘residual pebbles of the fourth row' (gsang-ba yang-khug-gi rdel-ro). 69 In addition, the first three columns of the first, second and
third rows, labelled as sectors 1-3, are said to correspond to the varying degrees of wealth within the family (nor-sa). The sequence of the
permutation is clearly indicated in schematic charts 6.8 and 6.9, utilising a model family of six members. The reading is once again made
in respect of the earth tiger year.
6.8 The Chinese method of pebble distribution: Initial layout
Present year (gnam-lo):
Subject C:
Subject D:
Subject E:
Subject A:
fire mouse (aged 63)
earth tiger
fire sheep (aged 32)
30 v. water =XX
Body: earth
1 v. water =XX
Subject F:
water monkey (aged 7)
10 v. iron = 0%
8 v. iron=00
Vitality: wood
Subject B:
wood snake (aged 34)
11 v. fire = 0x
13 v. fire = 0
15 v. wood = 00
17 v. water = 0%
19 Red 9
3 v. water = 0x
water ox (aged 26)
21 v. wood=00
23 v. earth =XX
25 v. water = XX
27 v. water = 0%
earth horse (aged 21)
20 v. fire = 0x
18 v. fire = 000
16 v. earth = 0
14 v. iron=X
28 v. earth=XX
Destiny: earth
5 v. fire = 0
6 v. water =XX
26 v. fire = 0X
24 v. fire =00
Luck: iron
7 v. wood =XX
4 v. wood =XX
9 Red 9
29 Yellow 5
22 Blue 3
12 Red 7
2 Yellow 5
Current numeric square
(babs-sme): Black 2
6.9 The Chinese method of pebble distribution: Permutated layout
The layout of the twenty-five pebbles in three sectors rearranged according to the degrees of wealth
Divine sector A
Divine sector B Divine sector C
1 XX
2 Yellow 5
30x
4 XX
5 0x
6 XX
7 XX
residual pebbles
(rdel-ro len-pa)
Human sector A
Human sector B
Human sector C
30 XX
29 Yellow 5
28 XX
27 00
26 Ox
25 XX
24 00
residual pebble of second
row (khug-pa'i rdel-ro)
15 00
Household sector B
Household sector C
Household sector A
17 00
18 0°C
19 Red 9
20 Ox
21 00
22 Blue 3
23 XX
residual pebbles of third
row (yang-khug rdel-ro)
16 0
Enemy sector
14 X
-
1300
12 Red 7
11 Ox
10
9 Red 9
800
no residual pebble of fourth
row (gsang-ba yang-khug
rdel-ro med
In general, as far as the first row or ‘divine' sector (lha-sa) is concerned, if the pebbles representing the ‘divine' sector are black one should
perform rites of incense and ablution, avoiding enmity and blood feuds. If they are red, one should avoid the pollution of over-boiling a
stove. If they are blue and red, serpentine spirits and haunting spirits (btsan) should be reconciled. If they are green, one should avoid
conflict and enmity. If they are yellow, there will be infectious diseases, which should be averted by the use of the gtsug-gtor stong-bzlog
rgyal-mdos thread-cross. If they are white, it will be auspicious.
As far as the second row or 'human' sector (mi-sa) is concerned, if the pebbles are white, wishes will be fulfilled
and good auspices will prevail. If they are black, the primordial bewitchers (ye-'brog) will suddenly emerge. If they are blue, there will be
dermatitis (shu-thor). If they are green, the thread-cross of the eight serpentine spirits and nine klu-bsen?º should be made. If they are red,
one should perform the rites of the dmar-ngo gri-kha mtshon-bsgyur and the nag-po mgo-gsum dgra-bsgrub. If they are yellow, there will be
contagious fevers, and the thread-cross of bdud-mdos or ma-tram khrag should be employed.
As far as the third row or household' sector (khyim-sa) is concerned, if the pebbles are white there will be good
auspices. If they are black, there will be ill-health within the household, and the bdud-kyi bla-khram 'phrul-gsum should be made. If they are
blue or green, ritual charms (gto) associated with the eight serpentine spirits should be made, and if they are yellow, rites to avert conta-
gious fevers should be performed. If they are red, thread-crosses should be made to counteract the pollution of over-boiling a stove.
Opposite Detail of Plate 9, fig. 13 (see p. 254), showing the calculation
of the first multiple of nine based on the subject's constitutional type



258
The White Beryl
Diverse predictions (rdel-ro'i kha-dmar) can then be made corresponding to the overall spread of the permutated and residual pebbles. For
example, if the second sector of the 'household” row is marked by a white pebble, it is predicted that an enemy will be prominent, but if it is
some other colour, the head of the enemy will be entwined in yak wool (dgra-mgo re-bas phur). If the first sector of the divine' row is marked
by a white pebble, which remains white after the permutated calculation (khug-pa) and further permutated calculation (yang-khug) of the
second and third rows?l have been applied, diseases associated with the gods will ensue; but if it is black after the first and last reading,
demons will afflict the protector deities and it will be inauspicious, requiring the subject to erect prayer-flags on mountain summits. If the
human' sector is marked by a white pebble, the relatives will be in good health, and if the household' sector is marked by a white pebble,
there will be no losses and an abundance of wealth. If a white pebble coincides with the enemy' sector (dgra-sa), however, there will be dis-
putations. This mode of divination is summarised by Lo-chen Dharmaśrī in the following verses (Moonbeams, ff. 295–30b):
And without mistaking the order of seniority (within the family].
The three first (pebbles of the second row (are rearranged within]
Then, these variegated pebbles should be taken and placed,
The so-called first, second and third 'human' sectors.
Then, there is the system of pebbles utilised in China:72
[Here], the subject comprises a single family;
And there are four pebbles of conclusive analysis
[Resulting from the subject's vitality, body, destiny and luck aspects,
[Being contrasted] with the vitality, body, destiny and luck aspects
Starting with the sector of the body in the first row of pebbles,
After reaching the end of both these first and second [rows],
The next set of pebbles should be taken one by one and placed in sequence
And ending with that of the element [of the numeric square) in the last row.
All the pebbles should be taken into this grid (se-rdar 78 and laid out,
This is known as the 'system of extended pebbles'. 74
[In the row) below the 'human' sector.
of the present year.
A single white or black pebble should be deployed for each aspect, as usual.
Then, a (fifth coloured) pebble is placed
Representing the [subject's current] numeric square,
Then, the first three pebbles (are rearranged) within the first, second and third 'divine' sectors.
The first three of these (latter] pebbles (are rearranged within]
The first, second and third 'household' sectors.
One should inspect in detail the distinct sectors and the residual pebbles (rdel-ro),
And examine the results [of these divinations outlined]
In the Commentary entitled Black Seminal Point ("Grel-pa thig-le nag-po).
Once these have been placed sequentially,
Its colour corresponding to the colour of the respective elements.
The remaining pebbles should be taken up one by one and half are permutated?
The calculation begins first with male [family members), followed by females,
[So that the pebbles of the second and fourth rows are placed in reverse).
3. Utilising 360 pebbles
In the combined Chinese method for calculating obstacle years, attributed to Mar-ston Jo-smon, which is sometimes known as the 'con-
vergence of three Chinese systems’,76 or as the three cycles of sPang-rgyan lo-md”,77 there are three successive stages of calculation, each
employing 120 pebbles, which are respectively named the gSer-lo-an, gYu-lo-can and Dung-lo-can methods.
First, according to the gSer-lo-can method, there are 120 pebbles representing the contrast between the subject's
vitality, body, destiny, luck and numeric square, and the vitality, body, destiny, luck and numeric square of the present year; along with
the seventh-removed sign (bdun-zur) of the present year, its sixth-removed following sign (mar-gyi drug-'bras) and its fourth-removed
sign (bzhi-gshed).78 Chart 6.10 is self-explanatory.
6.10 The gSer-1o-can method
Present year (gnam-lo): earth tiger
Seventh-removed bdun-zur aspect of present year: wood monkey
Sixth-removed following drug-'bras aspect of the present year:
Fourth-removed following adversarial aspect of the present year:
water sheep
iron snake
Subject (brtsi-bya): fire dragon
vitality
body
destiny
luck
numeric
vitality
body
ma
destiny
luck
numeric
vitality
body
destiny
luck
numeric
vitality
destiny
luck
numeric
body
= iron
= earth
= wood
= earth
= iron
square =
= iron
= water
= wood
= wood
square =
= earth
= wood
= water
- fire
fire
square=
= fire
= iron
= water
square=
earth/Yellow 5
water/Blue 3
vitality: earth
0 x
ОХ
body: earth
00
X
00
00
XX
do 1
water/Black 2
de ox
00
Ox - XX
00
00 XX
XX
XX 00
X X
ox
00
XX
XX
XX
e
X
destiny: fire
xx xxоох
0
0
0
0 0
o o ox 00
OX OX00 XX
00 0 0 XX
-
0
0
X
0
water/Black 2
0 0 0
XX XX
o o
0 0
XX
00
o o
o
0
XX
o
1
00
o
o
xx
x
ХХ
xx
x
XX
X
0
ox
ox
00
o
o
X
00
00
XX
ox
x
ox
ox
00
o
o
luck: wood
ox
XX
XX
e
00
x
ox
00
00
XX
ОХ
x
00
VO
0
current numeric square: Red 7
Predictive pebble
X
o
X
o
Secondly, according to the gYu-lo-can method, there are 120 pebbles determining the contrast between the subject's vitality, body, des-
tiny, luck and numeric square and the corresponding five aspects of the subjects own log-men, and its seventh-removed sign (bdun-zur),
its sixth-removed following sign (mar-gyi drug-'bras) and its fourth-removed sign (bzhi-gshed), as shown in chart 6.11.
6.11 The gYu-lo-can method
Subject's log-men: iron mouse
Subject (brtsi-bya): fire dragon
vitality
body
destiny
luck
= water
= earth
= iron
= wood
vitality: earth
IU
body: earth
00
0
- ox
XX
XX
00
0
ox
XX
XX
ox
oo
O
Seventh-removed bdun-zur aspect of log-men: fire horse
Sixth-removed following drug-'bras aspect of log-men: wood snake Fourth-removed following adversarial aspect of log-men: water hare
numeric vitality body destiny luck numeric vitality body destiny luck numeric vitality body destiny luck numeric
square = = fire = water = fire = iron Square = = fire = fire
= wood
= water square = = wood = iron
= water = fire square =
wood/Green 4
fire/Red 7
iron/White 8
iron/White 1
XX
x
OX x
оох
ох X XX XX
e X
0 0
0 x 00 00 XX e XX
x Oxx
00
OX OX00 XX 00
00
X oX X XX XX
X
0000 XX
X X
00
ОХ 00XX 0000 00 XX e XX o º X ox x
. Х ОХ x
OX OX 0 0 XX 00 OX OX 0 0 XX 00
oo x x x o o x x x x xoxo
66
00
XX
X
Zoo
destiny: fire
luck: wood
current numeric square: Red 7
XX
O
OU
Predictive pebble
Thirdly, according to the Dung-lo-can method, there are 120 pebbles representing the contrast between the subjects vitality, body, des-
tiny, luck and numeric square and the present month, with its seventh-removed sign (bdun-zur), its sixth-removed following sign (mar-
gyi drug-'bras) and its fourth-removed sign (bzhi-gshed). This method is shown in chart 6.12.



259
Divinations of obstacle years
6.12 The Dung-lo-can method
Present month: 10th month/iron ox
Seventh-removed bdun-zur aspect of present month: fire sheep
Fourth-removed following adversarial aspect of present month: wood dragon
Subject (brtsi-bya): fire dragon
vitality
body
destiny
luck
numeric
vitality
body
numeric
vitality
destiny
luck
numeric
destiny
= fire
luck
= fire
body
= fire
= earth
= earth
= iron
= water
square =
= earth
= water
fire
square =
= fire
= earth
= wood
= wood
square =
White 6
fire/Red 9
ОХ
00
0 0
00
0
00
0
0 0
0x
XX
X
0x
XX
X
vitality: earth
body: earth
destiny: fire
luck: wood
current numeric square: Red 7
Predictive pebble
00
ox
0
0
ox
00
00
0
Blue 3
0
0 X
00
XX
XX
X
0
0
ox
00
00
0
0
0
00
XX
XX
X
Sixth-removed following drug-'bras aspect of present month: fire horse
vitality body destiny luck numeric
=water = fire = iron square =
fire/Red 7
x OXх
00 00 XX e XX
o
X ox x
ox ox 00 XX 00
00 00 X Ox x
0
0
X
00
e
ox
oxx
XX
X
o o ox
o o X
xx xxx
XXXX
©
e
0
0
bo
ox
0 0
ox
0
00
X
00
X
X
ox
x
x
x
These three additional modes of calculation are summarised as follows in the words of Lo-chen Dharmasrī (Moonbeams, ff. 306–31b):
Furthermore, the category of divination concerning the obstacle years
The (second cycle of the calculation]
Also includes the so-called 'convergence of three Chinese systems',
Follows the gYu-lo-can method of laying out the pebbles,
According to which there are altogether one hundred and twenty pebbles,
Otherwise known as the 'three cycles of sPang-rgyan lo-ma'.
Among these, the first cycle [of the calculation]
Determining the contrast between [the subject's) own five aspects,
including the vitality,
And the five aspects, including the vitality, of [the subject's) own log-men,
Follows the gSer-lo-can method of laying out the pebbles,
According to which there are altogether one hundred and twenty pebbles.
The (first] thirty of these comprise twenty-five pebbles representing the contrast
Between the subject's vitality, body, destiny, luck and numeric square
And its seventh-removed sign (bdun-zur),
Its sixth-removed following sign (mar-gyi drug-'bras)
And its fourth-removed sign (bzhi-gshed).
And the vitality, body, destiny, luck and numeric square of the present year;
Along with the five corresponding predictive pebbles.
Similarly, there are [three) other groups of thirty pebbles and predictive pebbles,
The [third cycle of the calculation]
Representing the contrast between the subject's [aforementioned]
Five elemental aspects, including the vitality,
And the five aspects, including the vitality
Follows the Dung-lo-can method of laying out the pebbles,
According to which there are altogether one hundred and twenty pebbles,
Representing the contrast, as before, [between the subject's five aspects),
And 80 the present month, with its seventh-removed sign (bdun-zur),
Its sixth-removed following sign (mar-gyi drug-'bras)
Of the seventh-removed sign (bdun-zur) of the present year,
Along with its sixth-removed following sign (mar-gyi drug-'bras), 79
And its fourth-removed sign (bzhi-gshed).
And its fourth-removed sign (bzhi-gshed).
The method of laying out all these three hundred and sixty pebbles
Is the teaching of Mar-ston Jo-smon.
4. Utilising 600 pebbles (Moonbeams, f. 31a)
Finally, a more complex method in which 600 pebbles are deployed also appears to have been prepared by Khyung-Ihas gZhon-nu bSod-
nams. As Lo-chen Dharmaśrī says (Moonbeams, f. 31a):
In addition to these, Khyung-Ihas gZhon-nu bSod-nams says that
The number [of pebbles) is increased to six hundred
By laying out one hundred and twenty (additional pebbles)
To represent each [of the contrasts between] the days and hours respectively.
Lo-chen's advice concerning predictions of obstacle years
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī concludes the discussion of obstacle years by remarking that although the diviner should refer to texts such as the
Gab-pa'i snying-gzer when making more detailed divinations, the practical methods outlined above may be employed in order to obtain
general predictions concerning lifespan, ill-health, diet, merit and demonic influence based respectively on an examination of the sub-
ject's vitality, body, destiny, luck and numeric square. In his own words (Moonbeams, f. 31a/b):
Concerning the results of such divinations,
It is stated in scholarly texts that they are found
In the commentary on the sDong-po kun-'dus,
Entitled Gab-pa'i snying-gzer.
However, in order to make a provisional user-friendly [reading),
A conclusive analysis can certainly be made,
According to any of the types of generic result,
Subsumed in the five general predictions, 81
Through which the (subject's] vitality,
body, destiny, luck and numeric square are examined
Respectively in terms of lifespan, ill-health, diet, merit, and demonic influence.
It is important to make a detailed determination
In order to eliminate the great fluctuations and calamities 82
Associated with the course of a given year.



VII
The impact of the hour of divination



ਨਾ ਆ



262
The White Beryl
There are diverse methods for divinations that are made with reference to specific past, present and future events, employing as many as
7,770 pebbles in one case, or 1,554 in another. Although a divination of natal horoscope, marriage, obstacle years, ill-health or death may
be carried out at any time, the diviner should be aware that there are particular portents associated with divinations made at the hours of
daybreak, sunrise, morning, noon, early afternoon, late afternoon and sunset (ff. 428a–429a), as illustrated on Supplementary Plate 20,
fig. 6. Frequently these portents appear bizarre and unrelated, yet it is in this context that the notion of auspicious coincidence (rten-'brel)
is most clearly discerned.' No divinations are recommended after sunset or before daybreak.
For example, if divinations are carried out at the hour of daybreak (nam-langs), they may portend contagion due
to countyside deities (yul-lha); afflictions due to malign goblins (the'u-brang) and spirit lords of the soil; a break-up of the locality with one
part being deserted; a couple who quarrel; a guest being poorly received; a loquacious wife; a husband prone to wandering; or paternal
relatives being cursed and subjected to disputations, while losses are inflicted on herds of oxen and cattle.
If divinations are carried out at sunrise (nyi-shar), they may portend contagion due to haunting spirits (bstan);
afflictions due to devouring spirits (za-'dre) and empty houses; fatal injuries; a much divided and poorly maintained environment; a cou-
ple who like fighting; neglect of the paternal ancestors; afflictions due to the haunting of evil spirits; a wife skilled in yak riding; an ill-
starred husband; or a broken home with a cracked bowl, which is not easy to keep clean; while losses will be inflicted on cattle.
If divinations are carried out in the morning (nyi-dros), they may portend contagion due to wealth-deities (nor-
lha); afflictions due to king spirits; a broken family; a divided locality; a couple who are far apart in age; paternal ancestors afflicted by
spirit lords of the soil; siblings who quarrel; or food containing little meat and few cooked vegetables, which is secretly consumed; dam-
age to both cattle and crops; and an average lifespan.
If divinations are carried out at noon (nyi-phyed), they may portend contagion due to klu-btsan spirits; afflictions
due to leprosy-causing bewitchers and spirit lords of the soil; divided uplands and lowlands; a couple subject to many diseases; a house-
hold that is not loved by outsiders despite an absence of domestic enmity; many fluctuations in food and wealth; a husband who sells half
the household wealth to others; a wife who is loquacious and has difficulty raising children; many disasters; or bad reputation and fatali-
ties; while cattle will be ill-starred and vegetables will consist of hard beans.
If divinations are carried out in the early afternoon (nyi-phyed yol), they may portend contagion due to haunting
spirits (btsan); afflictions due to king spirits and bewitchers; a family subject to fatal drowning and poisoning; a divided locality with many
ups and downs; broken vows; older husbands and younger wives; wealth in early life and poverty in later life; divulged secrets; important
matters neglected at the expense of trivia; and property that will be half squandered and half misappropriated by the wife. It will be hard
for such persons to earn the respect of relatives, the aged will be devoid of spiritual practice and overengaged in mundane activities, while
the children may be disabled.
If divinations are carried out in the late afternoon (nyi-myur), they may portend contagion due to serpentine spir-
its on the mountainside; afflictions of hunger due to king spirits; a family harmed by Bon or Buddhist ritual daggers (kīla); an empty gtor-
ma offering shrine; deaths in youth and adulthood; widowed neighbours; disrupted tombs; disabled children or siblings; and dissipated
wealth, resembling a stone carried off by a crow. Nonetheless there will be much to eat and little work to be done, and though criticised
by all they will not be ashamed. The husband will be engaged in pointless pursuits, while the wife will unintentionally go elsewhere.
Many children will die, the land and household will be subjected to theft, while cattle and children will be unproductive, as if one has
stolen from oneself.
Lastly, if divinations are carried out at sunset (nyi-nub), they may portend contagion due to rock-dwelling haunt-
ing spirits (brag-btsan) and the ghosts of murder victims (gre-bo); a family prone to fatal injuries; a woman afflicted by suicidal demons;
paternal relatives disturbed by blood feuds; the ending of the family line; fires breaking out on the estates; constant moving from one
locality to another; afflictions of widowhood; loss of family land to others; or subservience to another lord. There will be many children
with little to eat, as they will be partial to red-coloured foods. There will be constant subjection to cooking scalds and tumours, and many
domestic and external enmities.
The destiny elements governing the hour of divination (dus-tshod dbang-thang) are also considered, and these
have their distinctive attributes, as depicted on Plate 9 (fig. 18) and Plate 10 (fig. 4). In the case of each of the five elements, information
can be obtained concerning the subjects social class and character (mi-rigs), children (bu-tsha), wives (byan-mo), paternal ancestors (pha-
mes), neighbours (khyim-mtshes), ambition or purpose (don-sa), dogs or horses (sgo-khyi 'og-rta nor), property (dbang-nor), household
(khyim-sa), land (zhing-sa), tomb (dur-sa), diseases due to demonic possession ('dre-nad), food (zas), clothing (gos), personal life (rang-sa),
incompatible pillow (sngas), incompatible mental support (blo-brtan), and offended protector deities (lha-bsrungs). If counteracting rites
are not undertaken, the portents will be inauspicious from the start.
For example, when the destiny element governing the hour of divination is wood, the subject could well be an
aristocrat, though possibly without heirs, tall in stature, long-haired, and with enemies in the west and friends in the east. His children
will have auspicious marks, though half of them will die and only half will survive, perhaps with physical disabilities. His wife will be in
confrontation with the spirit lords of the soil, and become devoted to Buddhist practice, while wealth will fluctuate and many debts will
be incurred. His parents will be controversial, dying abroad or on a business trip. His neighbours will be small in stature, hoarse, vindic-
tive and quarrelsome. His ambitions will not be fulfilled, though he will have no enemies. His dogs and horses will be yellow and blue in
colour. His property will be haunted by the ghosts of murder victims (gre-bo), then sold, and despatched on pack animals, while a
turquoise will be worn as a neck ornament. The door of his house will face east or west, there will be no garden, or else no curd and wine,
while king spirits and bdud-btsan demons ingress. His fields will be undulating, with sparsely growing trees, or else they will be divided
by a meadow and a spirit lord of the soil will frequent them, or they will be disputed. His tomb will face the west, with an ox-shaped hill to
the right and a knotted valley to the left, with the 'heavenly gate' to the east and a narrow entrance to the mountains or valley. An ances-
tral devouring demon (za-'dre) of the king spirit or attachment spirit genus (rgyal-bsen) will haunt the subject, coming in pursuit from
the east. His diet will consist of fruit or unclean food, or cooked vegetable dishes served by a blue-complexioned woman on a triangular
plate, or a plate with a handle, but it will not be satisfying. His clothes will be blue in colour, or else of dark fabric. His personality will be



Above Detail of Plate 21, fig. 2 (see p. 270), showing the possible
causes of interruption when the trigram Dva governs the hour
of divination
whimsical, for which reason he will not be respected, and there will be bad omens such as a red mat, a crow, an arrow or a fish, which are
the retributions of a curse, and are to be ritually averted. His pillow will mistakenly be placed alongside wood or earth. His mistaken
mental support in such times of stress will be iron or weaponry. Lastly, his protector deity will be a Buddhist or Bon deity, propitiated
from childhood, but aggrieved because the offerings have been interrupted.
Similarly, when the destiny element governing the hour of divination is fire, it portends the subject will be of a
Buddhist or potter's family background, but harassed due to a blood feud, short-tempered, virtuous, tall in stature, prone to many ups and
downs, conciliatory and ruddy complexioned. Half of his children will die and those who survive will be ineffectual daughters. Though
proficient in business, they will have many quarrels and engage in acts of butchery. His wife will have endured a blood feud at her pater-
nal home, and be prone to ill-health, while wealth will not be conserved, just like a pile of chaff above a waterhole. His parents will have a
wanderlust, causing the family line to be displaced, and eventually dying of knife wounds or fever. His neighbours will be dark or yellow
complexioned, loud-mouthed, and afflicted by spirit lords of the soil, or by serpentine and plague-causing spirits (klu-gnyan). His purpose
will be unsuccessful owing to lameness, stooping posture or some such disability. His dogs and horses will be red or white. His property
will diminish, consequent on the loss of prosperity in the wake of grey or black-coloured cattle heading north. The family line may end or
compensation will be incurred. The door of his house will face south or north, with a red spear-shaped hill visible through the open door.
There will be many daughters, hard to raise, while serpentine and haunting spirits will ingress. His fields will be triangular with red soil,
and afflicted by serpentine spirits. His tomb will face north, with pale earth to the left and a valley shaped like a planted spear to the right,
with a red volcanic hill with a forked summit in the south. There will be afflictions due to serpentine and haunting spirits, inducing sud-
den possession by the primordial bewitchers (ye-'brog), or there will be head wounds, burns, knife-wounds, abdominal spasm and the risk
of death. Alternatively, hunting and king spirits will inflict harm, and a tall red figure will appear and explain this to be a curse upon the
paternal relatives. The subject's diet will be red-coloured, or else a red dish of cooked meat and vegetables will be served in a red con-
tainer by a woman facing south or north. His clothes will be red or dark. He will be at odds with his paternal relatives, there will be a red
hill with a palm tree to the south, or else a circular mound. There will be a red or yellow mat, and a red man with a red horse will appear,
encouraging him to be a businessman or a leader of thieves. His pillow will be mistakenly placed alongside iron or weaponry. His mis-
taken mental support in such times of stress will be water. Lastly, his protector deity will be an emanation in the form of a white yak,
which grants protection to the front and rear, but becomes enraged claiming it has been neglected.
When earth is the destiny element governing the hour of divination, the subject will be of a mantrin or nun's fam-
ily, but the locality will be afflicted by spirit lords of the soil. His children will all be sons, but only half of them will survive, and they may



264
The White Beryl
swwgucztathcova wizing wig
༥ཡ་སངས་
15
MO
Plate 20, fig. 6
A divination made at noon
A divination made in the early afternoon
A divination made in the late afternoon
(nyi-myur)
(nyi-phyed)
(nyi-phyed yo)
may portend contagion due to klu-btsan spirits,
may portend contagion due to haunting spirits (btsan),
afflictions due to king spirits and bewitchers, a family
afflictions due to leprosy-causing bewitchers and
Plate 20, fig. 6 (Ms II, ff. 19–24): Negative predictions associated with divinations made on specific hours of the day (White Beryl, ff. 428–429a)
Predicted negative results associated with divinations made at specific hours of the day (dus-rtsis dus-tshod bcu-gnyis-kyi 'bras-bu)
A divination made at daybreak
A divination made at sunrise
A divination made in the morning
(nam-langs)
(nyi-shar)
(nyi-dros)
may portend contagion due to countryside deities may portend contagion due to haunting spirits (btsan), may portend contagion due to wealth-deities,
(yul-Iha), afflictions due to malign goblins
afflictions due to devouring spirits (za-'dre) and empty afflictions due to king spirits, a broken family,
(the'u-brang) and spirit lords of the soil, a break-up houses, fatal injuries, a much divided and poorly a divided locality with two or three parts, a couple
of the locality with one part being deserted, a couple maintained environment, a couple who like fighting, who are far apart in age, paternal ancestors afflicted
who quarrel, a guest being poorly received, a
neglect of the paternal ancestors, afflictions due to the by spirit lords of the soil, siblings who quarrel,
loquacious wife, a husband prone to wandering, or haunting of evil spirits, a wife skilled in yak riding, an food containing little red meat and few cooked
paternal relatives being cursed and subjected to ill-starred husband, a broken home with a cracked vegetables, which is secretly consumed, damage
disputations, while losses are inflicted on herds of bowl, which is not easy to keep clean, while losses to both cattle and crops and an average lifespan.
subject to fatal drowning and poisoning, a divided
spirit lords of the soil, divided uplands and lowlands,
a couple subject to many diseases, a household
which is not loved by those outside but which has
may portend contagion due to serpentine spirits on the
mountainside, afflictions of hunger due to king spirits, a
family harmed by Bon or Buddhist ritual daggers (kīla),
an empty gtor-ma-offering shrine, deaths in youth and
adulthood, neighbours who are widowed, disrupted
locality with many ups and downs, broken vows, older
husbands and younger wives, wealth in early life and
domestic enmity, many fluctuations in food and
wealth, a husband who sells half the household
wealth to others, a wife who is loquacious and has
difficulty raising children, many disasters, bad
oxen and cattle.
are inflicted on cattle.
poverty in later life, divulged secrets, important matters tombs, children and siblings who are disabled, and
neglected at the expense of trivia, and property which dissipated wealth, resembling a stone carried off by a
will be half squandered and half misappropriated by crow, but there will be much to eat and little work, and
the wife. It will be hard for such persons to earn the though criticised by all they will not be ashamed. The
respect of relatives, the aged will be devoid of husband will be engaged in pointless pursuits, while the
spiritual practice and overengaged in mundane wife will unintentionally go elsewhere. Many children
activities, while the children may be disabled. will die, the land and household will be subject to theft,
reputation and fatalities, while cattle will have little
luck and vegetables will consist of hard beans.
while cattle and children will be unproductive, as if
one were stealing from oneself.
A divination made at sunset (nyi-nub)
A divination made at dusk
A divination made at late evening
A divination made after midnight
A divination made at dawn
may portend contagion due to rock-dwelling haunting
(sa-sros)
A divination made at midnight
(nam-phyed)
no reading given in White Beryl.
(srod-'khor)
no reading given in White Beryl.
(phyed-yol)
(tho-rangs)
no reading given in White Beryl.
spirits (brag-btsan), and the ghosts of murder victims
no reading given in White Beryl.
no reading given in White Beryl.
(gre-bo), a family prone to fatal injuries, a woman
afflicted by suicidal demons, paternal relatives disturbed
by blood feuds, the ending of the family line, fires
breaking out on the estates, constant moving from one
locality to another, affliction due to widowhood, loss
of family land to others, and subservience to another
lord. There will be many children with little to eat, as
they are partial to red-coloured foods. There will be
constant exposure to cooking scalds and tumours,
and many domestic and external enmities.



265
The impact of the hour of divination
argit
Decor
الراااددددددددد
ནམཁྱེན་
93tun
be physically disabled. His wife will die abroad and fatherless, or else abandoned on a mountain pass. His paternal relatives will show lit-
tle kindness to his children, prosperity will be lost in the eastern direction, and conflict will gradually flare among them, so that there will
soon be fatalities or injuries. His neighbours will be of bluish complexion and well-built, but instead of living quietly by themselves they
will interfere and indulge in gossip. His purpose will be successful but ignoble, and business will be moderate. His dogs and horses will be
yellow or black. Wealth will be dissipated. The door of his house will face south-west or north-west, with a stūpa or tomb visible in the
north-east, while curd and wine will be fermented indoors. His fields will be without enemies and his livelihood will be excellent. His
tomb will face the north, with a rocky mountain or red cave on the right, a reddish slate hill on the left, and a pathway below. The spirit
lords of the soil, countryside deities and king spirits will give support while the serpentine and attachment spirits will inflict harm, either
because a leprous corpse has been buried or on account of desire for a woman. His diet will comprise unclean bread or cooked green veg-
etables, served in a narrow container, or else the food will be brought to an unclean location by a child or someone dressed in yellow, and
facing south-west. His clothes will be red or yellow. Three paternal relatives or siblings will die due to the so-called “impediment caused
by wood' (shing-'gags) or else due to contagious fevers; and there will be a white or hide mat. It will be auspicious if this subject marries
someone with a compatible year-sign and luck element. His pillow mistakenly will have a water pitcher and delicious food alongside. His
mistaken mental support in such times of stress will be wood. His protector deity will assume the form of a black man riding a black horse
who brings forth many children but who is nonetheless displeased.
When iron is the destiny element governing the hour of divination, the subject will be a white complexioned vil-
lager in whose family a blood feud has occurred, who will be noisy, tall and unrestrained in speech. His children will include sons who are
hard to raise and daughters who are easy to raise. His wife will be an only child. His parents will otherwise be infertile, and prosperity will
be lost, symbolised by a grey cow moving out to the west; and they may be physically disabled or fall seriously ill due to disturbed spirit
lords of the soil or the ghosts of murder victims (gre-bo). His neighbours will be ruddy complexioned, insolent, deceitful, interfering and
haughty. His purpose will not be successful since a hostile god (dgra-lha) will appear in the guise of a white man on a white horse, saying,
‘I am hungry! I am thirsty! Serve food quickly! I'm exhausted!'. His dogs and horses will be bluish white. His property will be white and
metallic, while goats will be compatible. The door of his house will face east or west, and there will be a gully visible through the open
door. Curd will be fermented and there will be food to eat, and a white blanket. Children should beware since there will be bewitchers,
serpentine spirits and haunting spirits at the front door. His fields will resemble a basin, with small rocks, frequented by king spirits and
also a spirit lord of the soil. His tomb will face east, with a Buddhist or Bon hermitage on the right, a single building at the heavenly gate',
a gully at the valley entrance and a river below. King spirits, plague-causing spirits and spirit lords of the soil will cause afflictions. His
diet will include butter, cheesecake and eggs or dairy products, which will be served in a broken container by a woman dressed in white
and facing west. His clothes will be yellow or white. There will be five or three paternal relatives who die due to wounds. The maternal
uncle will endure great ups and downs. The mother will be absent but an aunt will be present, business will be successful but there will be



མས།
20>
Asse
DDD
92
དེ་བང་ནོར།
gt9)
སྒོ་ཁྱི་འོག་རྟ་ནོར།
དོན་ས།
1:|: ཕ་མེས་ཁྱིམ་མཚེས།
The White Beryl
266
»
Iད
ད
བྱ ན་མེ།
འགས།། བུ་ཚ་
ངང་༽
༢
，
༡༡
ས་
ཆན་ལས་
ན་མ་
ནས་
་་་
<
ན་་་་་་་
་
Plate 9, fig. 18 and Plate 10, fig. 4
་་
<
་་་
\ན་
་་
་
ལས།
་་་་་
་་་
ནས་
་་་་ ་
རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་
，
1:|:
， ， ་ -
ངོས་ནས
，
ཨ
་བ་
་་་་་་་་
，
་་་་
་་་་་་་
ནས་མན，་་་ ནད་
ནན་
ཀ
།།ན་ནས་སངས་
མ་ལམ་ལ་
ན་་་་་་་་་་་་་་
ར་ཡིན་ན་ང་
ས་ཀ་ནས་
ནས་ནི་
ན
་་་་་་་་
མ
།
་་་
་
<<རིང་
་་་
་་
་
།
ས་
ར
，



267
The impact of the hour of divination
འདྲེ་ནད།
བས་དེས།
བློ་བརྟན།
ལྷ་བསྲངས།
༤་
2%@
1
ན།
ཆ8:
Mk
FE
གི
།



268
The White Beryl
Ambition
Dogs, horses and cattle
(sgo-khyi 'og-rta nor)
Property
(dbang-nor)
Household sector
(khyim-sa)
(don-sa)
Plate 9, fig. 18 & Plate 10, fig. 4 (Ms 1, ff. 41-46): Aspects associated with the destiny elements governing the hour of divination (White Beryl, ff. 429a-432a)
The horizontal axis lists Subject's social class Children
Wives
Paternal ancestors Neighbours
the predictions affecting and character (mi-rigs) (bu-tsha)
(byan-mo)
(pha-mes)
(khyim-mtshes)
those who have affinity
with a given male subject,
while the vertical axis
lists the destiny elements
governing the hour of
divination ('di-nasthur-der
dus-tshod dbang-thang
'byung-ba'i ming 'phred-
'deng so-so ming)
Wood portends
The subject will be an aristocrat, His children will have
His wife will be in confrontation His parents will be controversial, His neighbours will be small in
though possibly without heirs, auspicious marks, and half with the spirit lords of the soil, dying abroad or on a business stature, hoarse, vindictive
tall in stature, long-haired, of them will die while only half and become devoted to trip.
and quarrelsome.
and with enemies in the will survive, perhaps with Buddhist practice, while
west and friends in the east. physical disabilities.
wealth will fluctuate and
His dogs and horses will be
His ambitions will not be
fulfilled, though he will have
yellow and blue in colour.
His property will be haunted by
the ghosts of murder victims
(gre-bo), then sold, and
despatched on pack animals,
while a turquoise will be
The door of his house will face
east or west, there will be no
garden, or else no curd and
no enemies.
wine, while king spirits
and bdud-btsan demons ingress.
many debts will be incurred.
worn as a neckornament.
Fire portends
His neighbours will be dark
His dogs and horses will be
red or white
The subject will be of a Buddhist Half his children will die and
or potter's family background, those who survive will be
but harassed due to a blood ineffectual daughters. Though
feud, short-tempered, virtuous, proficient in business, they
His wife will have endureda His parents will have a
blood feud at her paternal home, wanderlust, causing the
and be prone to ill-health, while family line to be displaced,
wealth will not be conserved, and eventually dying of knife
reminiscent of a pile of chaff wounds or fever.
or yellow complexioned,
loud-mouthed and afflicted
by spirit lords of the soilor
serpentine and plague-causing
spirits (klu-gnyen).
His purpose will be
unsuccessful owing to
lameness, stooping posture,
or some such disability.
His property will diminish,
consequent on the loss of
prosperity in the wake of grey
or black-coloured cattle
heading north. The family
line may end or compensation
will be incurred.
The door of his house will face
south or north, with a red spear-
shaped hill visible through
the open door. There will be
many daughters, hard to raise,
while serpentine and haunting
spirits will ingress.
tall in stature, prone to many
ups and downs, conciliatory
and ruddy complexioned.
will have many quarrels and
engage in acts of butchery.
above a waterhole.
Earth portends
Wealth will be dissipated.
The door of his house will face
The subject will be of a mantrin
or nun's family, but the locality
will be afflicted by spirit lords of
His children will be sons, and
half will survive, though they
may be physically disabled.
His wife will die abroad and
fatherless, or else abandoned
on a mountain pass.
His purpose will be successful
but ignoble, and business will
be moderate.
His dogs and horses will be
yellow or black.
south-westor north-west,
His neighbours will be of bluish
complexion and well-built, but
instead of living quietly by
themselves, they will interfere
and indulge in gossip.
with a stūpa or tomb visible in
the soil.
His paternal relatives will
show little kindness to
his children, prosperity will
be lost in the eastern
direction, and conflict will
gradually flare among them,
so that there will soon be
fatalities or knife-wounds.
the north-east, while curd and
wine will be fermented indoors.
Iron portends
His wife will be an only child.
His neighbours will be ruddy
His dogs and horses will be
His children will include sons
who are hard to raise and
The subject will be a white
complexioned villager in
whose family a blood feud has
occurred, noisy, tall and
unrestrained in speech.
His parents will otherwise be
infertile, and prosperity will
be lost, symbolised by a
bluish white.
His property will be white and
metallic, while goats will be
compatible.
complexioned, insolent,
deceitful, interfering and
haughty.
daughters who are easy
to raise.
grey cow moving out to
His purpose will be
unsuccessful since a hostile
god (dgra-lha) will appear in
the guise of a white man on a
white horse, saying, I'm
hungry! I'm thirsty! Serve
food quickly! I'm exhausted!'
the west, and they may be
physically disabled or become
seriously ill due to the afflictions
of disturbed spirit lords of
the soil and the ghosts of
The door of his house will face
eastor west, and there will
be a gully visible from the open
door. Curd will be fermented
and there will be food, and a
white blanket. Children should
beware since there are
bewitchers, and serpentine or
haunting spirits haunting the
front door.
murder victims.
Water portends
The subject will be of dark
His neighbours will be yellow
His property will consist of yaks
The door of his house will face
His purpose will not be
successful because the
His dogs and horses will be
black or red.
complexioned, quietly spoken
and 'bri.
north; and the house will be
His children will include two
sisters and one brother born in
between, who will all outlive
the subject.
complexion, of a Bon or
village family background,
loud-voiced, capricious and
without reliable support.
and truthful.
previous year ayak-load will
have been lost, or else it will
be a time when thieves arrive.
darkor uneasy, with wine being
drunk and dark clothes hanging
on the clothes line.
His wife will bring great His parents will be prone to
fluctuations in fortune upon blood feuds, or malicious
her parental home,
laughter, reminiscent of
reminiscent of a fire which a subterranean river flowing
gradually burns and suddenly below a cave.
dies; and she will be widowed
or divorced, kinder to
strangers than to relatives,
travelling aimlessly, living
from hand to mouth, and
inviting enemies and accusations.



269
The impact of the hour of divination
Diet (zas)
Pillow
Land sector
(zhing-sa)
Tomb sector
(dur-sa)
Diseases due to demonic
possession ('dre-nad)
Clothing
(gos)
Subject's personal sector
(rang-sa)
Mental-support
(blo-brtan)
Protector deities
(Iha-bsrungs)
(sngas)
An ancestral devouring demon
His diet will consist of fruit
His clothes will be blue in colour,
His mistaken mental support
His pillow will be mistakenly
placed alongside wood or earth.
or unclean food, or cooked
or else of dark fabric.
in such times of stress will be
of the king spiritor attachment
spirit genus will haunt the
vegetable dishes served by a
His fields will be undulating,
with sparsely growing trees,
or else they will be divided by a
meadow and a spirit lord of the
soil will frequent them, or they
will be disputed.
His personality will be subject
to many ideas, for which
reason he will not be respected,
and there will be bad omens
iron or weaponry
His tomb will face the west,
with an ox-shaped hill to
the right and a knotted valley to
the left, with the heavenly gate'
to the east and a narrow entrance
to the mountains or valley.
His protector deity will be
a Buddhist or Bon deity,
propitiated from childhood,
but aggrieved because the
offerings have been interrupted.
subject, coming in pursuit from
the east.
bluish complexioned woman on
a triangular plate, or a plate with
such as a red mat, a crow, an
a handle, but it will not be satisfying.
arrow, a fish, which are the
retributions of a curse, and are
His tomb will face north, with
His clothes will red or dark.
His fields will be triangular with
red soil, and afflicted by
serpentine spirits.
to be ritually averted.
He will be at odds with his
paternal relatives, there will
His pillow will be mistakenly
placed alongside iron or weaponry.
His mistaken mental support
in such times of stress will be
His food will be red-coloured, or
else a red dish of cooked meat
and vegetables will be served in
a red container by a woman
facing south or north.
beared hill with a palm tree
pale earth to the left and a valley
shaped like a planted spear to
the right with a red volcanic hill
with a forked summit in the south.
water.
His protector deity will be an
emanation in the form of a white
yak, which grants protection to
the front and rear but becomes
enraged, claiming it has been
to the south, or else a circular
mound. There will be a red or
There will be afflictions due to
serpentine and haunting spirits,
inducing sudden possession by
primordial bewitchers (ye-'brog),
and there will be head wounds,
burns, knife-wounds, abdominal
spasm and the risk of death.
Alternatively, haunting and
king spirits will inflict harm, and
a tall red figure will appear and
yellow mat, and a red man with
neglected
ared horse will appear,
encouraging the subject to be a
businessman or leader of thieves.
explain this to be a curse upon
the paternal relatives.
His fields will be without enemies
His diet will consist of
His clothes will be red or yellow.
His pillow mistakenly will
His mistaken mental support in
such times of stress will be wood.
and his livelihood will
unclean bread or cooked green
His tomb will face the north,
with a rocky mountain or red
cave on the right, a reddish
slate hill on the left, and a
pathway below.
Three paternal relatives or
siblings will die due to the so-
called 'wood-impediment'
The spirit lords of the soil,
countryside deities and king
spirits will give support while
the serpentine and attachment
spirits will inflict harm, either
have a water pitcher and
delicious food alongside.
be excellent.
His protector deity will appear
as a black man riding a black
horse who brings forth many
children but who is nonetheless
(shing-'gags) or due to
vegetables, served in a narrow
container, or else the food
will be brought to an unclean
location by a child or someone
dressed in yellow, and facing
displeased.
because a leprous corpse
contagious fevers; and there
will be a white or hide mat.
It will be auspicious if he marries
has been buried or on account
of desire for a woman.
south-west.
someone with a compatible
year-sign and luck element.
His clothes will be yellow or white.
There will be five or three paternal
His pillow will be mistakenly
placed alongside wood.
King spirits, plague-causing
spirits and spirit lords of
the soil will cause afflictions.
His mistaken mental support
in such times of stress will be a
His protector deity will appear
as a white rider on a white
His fields will resemblea
basin, with small rocks,
frequented by king spirits and
also a spirit lord of the soil.
relatives who die due to
His tomb will face east, with
a Buddhistor Bon hermitage
on the right, a single building
at the 'heavenly gate', a
gully at the valley entrance,
His diet will include butter,
cheesecake, and eggs or
dairy products, which will be
served in a broken container
by a woman dressed in
wounds. The maternal uncle
fire and a heap of charcoal.
horse, who repeatedly demands
food and drink, pleading
will endure great ups and
downs. The mother will be
exhaustion.
and a river below.
white and facing west.
absent but an aunt will be
present, business will be
successful but there will be
disputes, lung diseases, colic,
scandal and ingressing
serpentine or king spirits.
His head will be encrusted with
dirt, his seat will be blue or black,
His fields will
His tomb will face south with
Cold diseases, serum disorders
His clothes will be white or
His pillow will be mistakenly
placed alongside ashes or brick
His mistaken mental support
in such times of stress will be
His diet will consist of wine,
fermented dough-balls, or
some beverage carried in an
His deity will be the deity of a
maternal aunt who claims to be
a meadow to the right and a
channel narrow as a yoke, and
afflicted by bsen-mo spirits,
so that even though they are
made of some dark fabric.
and dermatitis will be provoked
by the treacherous female oath-
breaking spirits (dam-sri-mo),
hermitage resembling
and afflictions will be caused
earth.
a protector but is exhausted
sleeping sheep or goats to the
unclean container and
by accumulating lost royal or
ministerial property.
because no first fruits of offering
have been donated.
vast their crops will be meagre.
left, but it will become exposed.
while serpentine spirits and spirit
lords of the soil will also afflict
served by a woman dressed
in dark clothes whose son has
died, or whose face is unclean,
and facing north.
ploughed furrows.



270
The White Beryl
disputes, lung diseases, colic, scandal and ingressing serpentine or haunting spirits. The subject's pillow will be mistakenly placed along-
side wood. His mistaken mental support in such times of stress will be a fire and a heap of charcoal. Lastly, his protector deity will assume
the form of a white rider on a white horse, who repeatedly demands food and drink, pleading exhaustion.
Then, when water is the destiny element governing the hour of divination, the subject will be of dark complexion,
of a Bon or village family background, loud-voiced, capricious and without reliable support. His children will include two sisters and one
brother born in-between, who all outlive the subject. His wife will bring great fluctuations in fortune upon her parental home, reminis-
cent of a fire which gradually burns and suddenly dies; and she will be widowed or divorced, kinder to strangers than to relatives, travel-
ling without purpose, living from hand to mouth, and inviting both enemies and accusations. His parents will be prone to blood feuds, or
malicious laughter, reminiscent of a subterranean river flowing below a cave. His neighbours will be yellow complexioned, quietly spo-
ken and truthful. His purpose will not be successful because the previous year a yak-load will have been lost, or else it will be a time when
thieves arrive. His dogs and horses will be black or red. His property will consist of yaks and 'bri. The door of his house will face north,
and its atmosphere will be dark and uneasy, with wine being drunk and dark clothes hanging on the clothes line. His fields will be irri-
gated by a channel narrow as a yoke, and afflicted by attachment spirits, so that even though they are vast their crops will be meagre. His
tomb will face south with a meadow to the right and a hermitage reminiscent of a sleeping sheep or goat to the left, but it will become
exposed. Cold diseases, serum disorders and dermatitis will be provoked by treacherous female oath-breaking spirits (dam-sri-mo), while
serpentine spirits and spirit lords of the soil will also afflict the ploughed furrows of the fields. The subject's diet will consist of wine, fer-
mented dough-balls or some beverage carried in an unclean container and served by a woman dressed in dark clothes whose son has died,
or whose face is unclean, and facing north. His clothes will be white or made of some dark fabric. His head will be encrusted with dirt, his
seat will be blue or black, and afflictions will be caused by accumulating lost royal or ministerial property. His pillow will be mistakenly
placed alongside ashes or brick. His mistaken mental support in such times of stress will be earth. Lastly, his deity will be the deity of a
maternal aunt who claims to be a protector but is exhausted because no first fruits of offering have been donated. In each of these cases,
counteracting rituals are indicated to render the hour of divination auspicious.
Kham
Gin
Zin
Zon
the gate will be facing north or west
the gate will be facing west or north
the gate will be facing east or north
the gate will be facing east or south
(sgo shar-Iho'am lho blta)
(sgo byang-ngam nub blta)
(sgo nub-bam byang blta)
(sgo shar-ram byang blta)
Plate 21, fig. 2 (Ms II: ff. 25–29): Predicted results based on the trigrams governing the hour of divination (White Beryl, f. 432a/b)
Predicted results based on the trigrams governing the hour of divination (dus-spar 'bras-bu)
Khon
Dva
Khen
the gate will be facing south or north the gate will be facing south or north the gate will be facing west or north the gate will be facing north-westor
(sgo lho'am byang-blta)
(sgo lho'am byang-blta)
(sgo nub-bam byang-blta)
south-west (sgo nub-byang-ngam
Tho-nub blta)
and there will be white horses or and there will be two or four couples, and there will be white or grey-coloured and there will be piebald horses, dogs
red-clothed persons, red material partial to meat and blood, great ups horses, donkeys or cattle, a white or cattle, a blue complexioned woman
objects afflicted by external demons, and downs, piebald horses, persons complexioned woman with moles, who limps and is lame, evil-hearted
a ruddy complexioned woman of wearing multicoloured clothes, bay short-tempered and hyperactive, and wild-tempered, with a great
large stature and bloodshot eyes and coloured cattle, variegated material without father or brother-in-law, and appetite for food.
and there will be blue-coloured horses,
and there will be a widow, piebald cattle, a
family with a history of madness, and two
dogs or cattle, a short-tempered wife
and there will be black-coloured horses,
dogs or cattle, black material objects
afflicted by external demons, a black
complexioned or tall woman, who is
nimble in movement but slurred in
and there will be black and piebald
horses, dogs or cattle, black cattle
afflicted by external demons, a well-
built woman with fine hair, one or three
married persons whose families are
with long teeth and a good figure, an
infertile uncle, and one or three siblings
who are close to the paternal uncle and
or four couples who are exceedingly loud-
mouthed.
various sorts of white coloured objects
speech, or a noisy and dirty person
cursed by demons, but who is kind-
father, but afflicted by obstacles and
close-fitting teeth, rough spoken and objects afflicted by external demons,
afflicted by malign goblins (the'u-brang) ayellow complexioned woman, aged
and moles afflicted by demons.
whose child has died, and whose
hearted and friendly to those around.
injuries, and the subject will decline.
and bewitchers, for which reason
and of frail faculties, for which reason
household comprises three persons.
specified rites should be undertaken.
specified rites should be undertaken.
at
JACM (CSHCgt
.
.
FE
SET
SA
11
ET
-
སྒོ་ལྷའི་སྤྱང་བལ་
agata augtak
Liggitiziga
algacorys
E-
1
15
.
.
LASSA
Vre
ANOS
NA
n



271
The impact of the hour of divination
Similar prognostications may be made when the trigrams governing the hour of divination are considered, as explained in White Beryl
(f. 432a/b), and also when the numeric squares governing the hour of divination are examined (ff. 430a-435b). In the former case
(Supplementary Plate 21, fig. 2), when the trigram governing the hour of divination is Li, the gate will be facing south or north, and pos-
sible causes of interruption will include white horses or red-clothed persons, red material objects afflicted by external demons, or a ruddy
complexioned woman of large stature with bloodshot eyes and close-fitting teeth, who is rough spoken and afflicted by malign goblins
(the'u-brang) and bewitchers.
When the trigram governing the hour of divination is Khon, the gate will be facing south or north, and possible
causes of interruption will include two or four couples who are partial to red meat and endure great ups and downs, piebald horses, per-
sons wearing multicoloured clothes, bay-coloured cattle, variegated material objects afflicted by external demons, or a yellow complex-
ioned woman who is aged and frail. When the trigram governing the hour of divination is Dva, the gate will be facing west or north, and
possible causes of interruption will include white or grey coloured horses, donkeys or cattle, a white complexioned woman with moles
who is short-tempered and without father or brother, or various sorts of white-coloured objects and moles afflicted by demons. When the
trigram governing the hour of divination is Khen, the gate will be facing north-west or south-west, and possible causes of interruption
will include piebald horses, dogs or cattle, or a blue complexioned woman who is limp, lame, evil-hearted, wild-tempered and hyperac-
tive, with a great appetite for food. When the trigram governing the hour of divination is Kham, the gate will be facing north or west, and
possible causes of interruption will include black-coloured horses, dogs or cattle, black material objects afflicted by external demons, a
black complexioned or tall woman who is nimble in movement but slurred in speech, or a noisy and dirty person whose child has died and
whose household comprises three persons. When the trigram governing the hour of divination is Gin, the gate will be facing west or
north, and possible causes of interruption will include black and piebald horses, dogs or cattle, black cattle afflicted by external demons, a
well-built woman with fine hair, and one or three married persons whose families are cursed by demons but who are kind-hearted and
friendly to those around. When the trigram governing the hour of divination is Zin, the gate will be facing east or north, and possible
causes of interruption will include blue-coloured horses, dogs or cattle, a short-tempered wife with long teeth and a good figure, an infer-
tile uncle, and one or three siblings who are close to the paternal uncle and father but also afflicted by obstacles and injuries, causing the
subject to decline. Lastly, when the trigram governing the hour of divination is Zon, the gate will be facing east or south, and possible
causes of interruption will include a widow, piebald cattle, a family with a history of madness, and two or four couples who are exceed-
ingly loud-mouthed. In the event of such negative interruptions occurring, the specified counteracting rituals should be undertaken.
Recognising the attributes of the numeric squares according
to the sMe-ba gsal-ba'i me-long (White Beryl, f. 433a)
When the numeric squares governing the hour of divination are considered, it is important at the outset to identify the types of person,
property, demon, shape and food to which they refer, as depicted on Plate 9, fig. 15. Thus, White One refers to travellers or guests, to
sheep or goats, to malign goblins (the'u-brang), semi-circular shapes and dairy products. Black Two refers to widowed or infertile per-
sons, hybrid cattle, malevolent forces, circular shapes, and to fish, tea and wine. Blue Three refers to adult women, oxen, attachment spir-
its (bsen-mo) and dropsy-causing spirits (dmu),s circular shapes and fish, tea and wine. Green Four refers to Buddhist monks and others
afflicted by serpentine spirits, as well as to material goods, serpentine water spirits, oblong shapes, cooked vegetables, roasted barley
flour (tsam-pa) and wine. Yellow Five refers to potentates, offering-sacraments, spirit lords of the soil, square shapes and bread. White
Six refers to gossips, armour and weapons, gods (deva), semi-circular shapes and dairy products. Red Seven refers to Bon priests, silk or
brocade, haunting spirits (bstan), triangular shapes and red meat. White Eight refers to merchants, bright objects, king spirits, semi-cir-
cular shapes and dairy products. Lastly, Red Nine refers to single men or women, head-butting cattle, imprecatory goddesses (ma-mo),
triangular shapes and red meat.
Plate 21, fig. 2
agaralgia
དཞུང་ངོ་སྤྱད་ལ་་
baizalegraagt



272
The White Beryl
”སླ་བ་
2
བར་ཞེས་པ་
OUVA
༧འདྲེས་ཤེས་
Plate 9, fig. 15
Plate 9, fig. 15 (Ms 1: ff. 39-41): Recognising the attributes of the numeric squares according to the sMe-ba gsal-ba'i me-long (White Beryl, f. 433a)
White 1
Black 2
Blue 3
Green 4
Yellow 5
White 6
Red 7
White 8
Red 9
travellers or guests
widowed or infertile persons
adult women
Buddhist monks and those
kings or fortunate persons
gossips
Bonpos
merchants
single men and women
Numeric square (sme-ba)
Recognising the type of
person to whom it refers
(mir shes-pa)
afflicted by serpentine spirits
(nāga)
sheep and goats
hybrid cattle
oxen
goods
offering-sacraments
armour and weapons
silk and brocade
bright objects
head-butting cattle
Recognising the type of
property to which it refers
(nor-shes-pa)
Recognising the type of
demon to whom it refers
malign goblins (the'u-brang)
malevolent forces (bdud)
water spirits (klu)
spirit lords of the soil (sa-bdag)
gods (Iha)
haunting spirits (btsan)
dark brown imprecatory
attachment spirits (bsen-
mo) and dropsy causing
spirits (dmu)
Pehar/king spirits
(dkor-bdag rgyal-po)
goddesses (ma-mo)
('drer shes-pa)
red semi-circle
white circle
white circle
red oblong
yellow square
red semi-circle
blue triangle
red semi-circle
blue triangle
Recognising the type of
shape to which it refers
(gzugs shes-pa)
Recognising the type of
diet to which it refers
dairy products
fish, tea and wine
fish, tea and wine
fish, tea and wine
cooked vegetables, roasted
bread
dairy products
red meat
fish, tea and wine
dairy products
red meat
barley flour (tsam-pa) and wine
(zas-su shes-pa)



273
The impact of the hour of divination
Calculating the extent of the numeric squares superimposed on the grid
of the subject's body (sme-ba'i sa-tshad rtsi-ba, White Beryl, f. 433 a/b)
When the sectors of the nine numeric squares are calculated with reference to the subject's body, the practical method is as follows. The
subject should lie on his or her back with the head to the west and the feet to the east, and the sector of the master above the crown of the
head. A grid is then visually superimposed upon the subject’s body. Prognoses referring to paternal uncles are directly divined in the
three upper or western sectors of the grid, while those concerning other paternal relatives are divined in the three right-sided or south-
ern sectors, those concerning maternal aunts in the three lower or eastern sectors, and those concerning other maternal relatives in the
three left-sided or northern sectors. Similarly, divinations made in the three central horizontal sectors (s-n) concern the subject's happi-
ness and sorrow, while those made in the three vertical sectors (w-E) concern childbirth.
Furthermore, the sectors of the left shoulder, crown of the head and right shoulder are respectively for prognoses
referring to the first, middle and last parts of a paternal uncle's life. At the same time, the right shoulder, right side of the body and right
leg are respectively the sectors for prognoses referring to the first, middle and last parts of the life of other paternal relatives, while the
right leg, feet and left leg have the same function for a maternal aunt; the left foot, left side of the body and left shoulder for a maternal
uncle, the crown of the head, the heart-centre and feet for a child; and the right side, heart-centre and left side for the subject's own life.
It will be auspicious if the readings for the first and last parts of the life indicate a mother- or friend-relationship,
since the subject will then be easy to raise or maintain, but inauspicious if one of these is inhibited, since the complexion will then fade.
Diseases will come in waves and one will soon die. Without mistaking this structure, the predicted readings should be made, and these
will vary depending on the coincidence of whichever of the nine numeric squares governs the hour of divination, as indicated in White
Beryl, ff. 434a-435a.
Now, when the numeric square governing the hour of divination is placed at the heart-centre, it coincides with
the subject's own household sector, while the crown of the head coincides with the grandparents' sector, the right shoulder with the
father's, the left shoulder with the maternal uncle's, the right side with the sector of other paternal relatives, the left side with the sector
of infectious diseases, the right leg with the sectors of siblings and riding horses, the left leg with the sectors of servants and fields, and
the feet with the sectors of the various other categories of relative: elder brother, mother and spouse among them.
An exemplary chart with the numeric square Yellow Five at the heart-centre of the supine subject is depicted on
Plate 9, fig. 17. Here, Yellow Five is identified with the household sector (khyim-sa) and the subject's personal sector (rang-sa), while
Black Two at the subject's right shoulder in the south-west is identified with the sector of the siblings (pha-bu'i sa); Red Seven at the sub-
ject's crown (spyi-sa) in the west is identified with the sector of teachers or grandparents (slob-spon/mes-po'i sa); White Six at the subject's
left shoulder in the north-west with the sector of maternal uncles (zhang-po'i sa); White One at the subject's left side in the north with the
sector of mothers-in-law and brothers-in-law (yam-kungs); White Eight at the subject's left leg in the north-east with the sector of ser-
vants and land (brang-'khor zhing-sa); Blue Three at the subject's feet in the east with the sector of mothers and spouses (ma zla-rogs);
Green Four at the subject's right leg in the south-east with the sector of younger siblings ('og-spun); and Red Nine at the subject's right
side in the south with the sector of other paternal relatives (pha-spun sa).
Plate 9, fig. 17
Plate 9, fig. 17 (Ms 1: f. 40): Calculating the extent of the numeric squares superimposed on the grid of the subject's body (sme-ba'i sa-tshad rtsi-ba), utilising the exemplary chart with Yellow Five at the centre (Inga-ser dper-
brjod, White Beryl, ff. 4339–435b) (NB head is west)
སྐོར་གསུས་ཁུ་ཟངས་མར་བརྩི།
aragard.se
སྤྱི་ས།
Inner chart
s
head/crown sector (spyi-sa)
left shoulder (phrag gYon)
right shoulder (phrag-pa gYas-so)
SW (Iho-nub)
W (nub)
NW (nub-byang)
Red 7, identified with the sector
White 6, identified with the sector
Black 2, identified with the sector
of the father's children
A
of teachers or grandparents
of maternal uncles
(pha-bu'i sa
(slob-spon/mes-po)
(zhang-po'i sa)
Red 9, identified with the sector
heart-centre Yellow 5, identified with
White 1, identified with sector of
FE : W
right side (blo-ga)
S (lho)
of other paternal relatives
the household sector (khyim-sa) and
the mother-in-law and brother-in-law
N(byang)
left side (blo-gYon)
the subject's personal sector (rang-sa)
(yam -kungs)
ཕ་སྤུན་ཟངས་མར་བརྩི་བར་བྱའོ་
(pha-spun sa)
Green 4, identified with the sector
of younger siblings
White 8, identified with the sector
མ་སྐུ་ཟངས་མར་བརྩེ་བར་བྱའོ་
Blue 3, identified with the sector
of mothers and spouses
of servants and land
pleme
('og-spun)
(brang-'khor zhing-sa)
3W LE
(ma-zla rogs)
E (shar)
SE (shar-lho)
NE (byang-shar)
right leg (rkang-pa gYas)
feet stretched out in front (mdun)
left leg (rkang-pa gYon)
Outer chart
The three upper sectors in the west are for directly divining the prognoses of paternal uncles (stod-gsum pha-khu zangs-mar brts).
The three front-sided sectors in the east are for directly divining the prognoses of maternal aunts (ma-sru zangs-mar brtsi'o).
ieste
The three right-sided sectors in the south are for directly divining the prognoses of other paternal relatives (pha-spun zangs-mar brtsi-bar bya'o).
The three left-sided sectors in the north are for directly divining the prognoses of other maternal relatives (ma-ru zangs-mar brtsi-ba'o).
The three vertical sectors in the centre (W-E axis) are those concerning childbirth (gzhung gsum bu-tsha'i sa).
The three horizontal sectors in the centre (N-S axis) are those concerning the subject's happiness and sorrow ('phred gsum rang-gi skyid-sdug sa).
ELELE. NIE.se
ལྔ་སེར་དཔེར་བརྗོད། །
When White One coincides with the sector of the grandparents (mes-po'i sa) at the crown of the head, the pattern of the nine
numeric squares suggests certain predicted results, as illustrated on Supplementary Plate 21, fig. 3. White One portends that the grand-
father will flourish but subsequently decline, and though the subject or family member will die painfully the grandfather will continue to
live, pale complexioned, and experiencing great ups and downs.



274
The White Beryl
Opposite Detail of Plate 21, fig. 3 (see p. 277), showing
predicted results when the numeric squares Red Seven and
White Eight govern the hour of divination
Black Two portends that there will be three generations, but the ancestors will eventually be faced with the ending of the family line,
orphanhood or widowhood, the spirit lords of the soil will be displeased and there will be drowning, or serious cold disorders, great
appetite, or blurred vision.
Blue Three portends that there will be five generations, but there will be drowning accidents or serious cold dis-
eases, the ritual dagger (kīla) will find its mark, and there will be great ups and downs, afflictions due to auspicious corpses (bkra), widow-
hood, and oppression by the treacherous spirits of affliction ('phung-sri).
Green Four portends that there will be four generations afflicted by ritual daggers (kīla) and serpentine spirits
(nāga). There will be haunted beams within the house, delight in travelling, and exposed knives.
Yellow Five portends that there will be five or two generations disliked by the spirit lords of the soil, or by Bon,
Buddhist or educated families, or else by ordained renunciates, while the spirit lords of the soil will cause affliction in the sectors of land
and house.
White Six portends that there will be family deaths due to nodes or tumours, hypocritical speech with bad inten-
tions, and cattle will be afflicted by demons.
Red Seven portends that there will be five generations but the family line will have a maternal uncle who dies of
accidental injuries, and there will be afflictions due to klu-btsan spirits,* disasters caused by overcooking food, and ruddy complexioned,
noisy persons with moles or physical marks.
White Eight portends that there will be an adult family member who dies accidentally despite having no wound
or weapon, and the house will be moved elsewhere.
Lastly, Red Nine portends that there will be initial growth and eventual poverty, resources will be squandered,
and prosperity will be diminished and lost to wealthy outsiders. These divinations may be applied to each of the sectors in turn, starting
from that of the grandfather at the crown of the head.
In general, the nine numeric squares respectively concern growth, childlessness, cattle, serpentine spirits (nāga),
chronic invalids, posterity, accidental death and the fate of sentient beings (shes-can). However, when physical characteristics or marks
are the object of the divination, Black Two is the numeric square associated with female physical marks and Red Seven the numeric
square associated with male physical marks, as indicated on Plate 21, fig. 3.
When the numeric squares governing the hour of divination are considered, there are further predictions, as illus-
trated also on Supplementary Plate 21, fig. 3. For example, if White One is the numeric square governing the hour of divination, the sky
and the ocean depths will move into the atmosphere, and from the snow mountain peaks a voice will be heard saying, 'You are responsible
for providing my share of food! If you do not provide it, there will be vertigo and pains of the upper part of the body.'
If Black Two is the numeric square governing the hour of divination, a black man will come riding a black
demonic horse and leading a black demonic dog, while a black demonic bird soars through the air, saying, 'If you do not provide my food-
offering, misfortunes will afflict those around you, a corpse will be cast into your hands, and primordial bewitchers (ye-'brog) will sud-
denly be sent forth
If Blue Three is the numeric square governing the hour of divination, the stream of a great river will appear, and
the foremost of attachment spirits (bsen-mo) will haunt a verdant well-watered meadow, with copses of trees interspersed, a carnivorous
piśācī (sha-za) or a treacherous female oath-breaking spirit (dam-sri-mo) of the wilderness will ask you for their crops, saying, 'If you do
not provide them, there will be physical disabilities.'
If Green Four is the numeric square governing the hour of divination, the foremost leader of the four or eight
classes of serpentine spirits (nāga) will manifest, and the sap of the trees in a verdant meadow will slowly well up like a spring of water
due to Bon or Buddhist rites, all the assembled serpentine or plague-causing spirits (klu-gnyan) will charge you, saying, 'If our share of
food is not provided, you will suffer all sorts of ailments due to serpentine spirits, such as dropsy.
If Yellow Five is the numeric square governing the hour of divination, there will be spirits lords of the country-
side, and of canals, field borders, ponds and houses, saying, My timely supplicatory prayers have been interrupted! Many deities of the
countryside have conferred and if you continue to interrupt our share of food-offerings then frost, fires, blight and famine will afflict the
land, cattle will be infected with plague, and human beings will be prone to podagra and rheumatism.'
If White Six is the numeric square governing the hour of divination, there will be medicinal herbs from the snow
mountains, the slate mountains, the grasslands and rivers, and a lake-dwelling mermaid (sman-mo), riding a doe, will confer with a multi-
tude of snow mountain goddesses (brtan-ma), saying, 'If you do not provide my share of food, various diseases will afflict human beings,
cattle and those around you.'
If Red Seven is the numeric square governing the hour of divination, there will be a red man riding a red horse
and leading a red dog, while a red bird soars in the sky. He will hold a red bow and arrow, with tiger-and leopard-skin quivers, saying,
‘All the haunting spirit (btsan) retainers have conferred, and all of them ask you to provide their share of food, otherwise there will be
knife fights and wounds.'
If White Eight is the numeric square governing the hour of divination, Pehar, lord of Buddhist treasuries, will be
present along with other wealth protectors, a yellow complexioned hostile god (dgra-lha) and a plague-causing protector of the wilder-
ness, saying, 'My treasure has been lost to another! Now, we have come to find it, and we are presently asking you for our share of food. If
you do not sustain us, there will be madness, diseases due to king spirits, and combined heart and wind disorders.'
Lastly, if Red Nine is the numeric square governing the hour of divination, there will be a woman riding a red
mule, along with the oath-bound protectors of the Buddhist teachings, coming from the eight renowned charnel grounds of ancient India,
cutting off the life of those who violate their spiritual commitments. The deity sMug-mo 'bum-gyi dpon-mo and many female demons will
come to request their food, saying, 'If you do not provide our share of food, your father and siblings will be afflicted by contagious diseases!
In all such negative cases, it is important to note that the appropriate counteracting thread-crosses (which are
specified in the text and also depicted on the plate) should be made to render the hour of divination auspicious.



CESSES



276
The White Beryl
Sari
69.16
SC
PSISENESES!
gus
Plate 21, fig. 3
Plate 21, fig. 3 (Ms II: ff. 25–29): Predicted results calculated on the basis of the numeric squares governing the hour of divination (White Beryl, ff. 433b-435a)
Predicted results calculated on the basis of the numeric squares governing the hour of divination (rme-bas rtsis-'bras)
White 1
Black 2
Blue 3
Green 4
Predicted results are associated
with the following numeric
squares when they are newly
inspected in the sector of the
grandfather and so forth (mes-po
sogs-sa'i gsar-brtag 'bras-bu)
in which case the actual
the grandfather will flourish but
there will be five generations, but there
there will be three generations, but the
ancestors will be faced with the ending
there will be four generations afflicted by
ritual daggers (kila) and serpentine spirits,
subsequently decline, and though
predicted results are as
follows ('bras-bu dngos)
the subject or family member will
of the family line, orphanhood or
will be drowning accidents or serious
cold diseases, the ritual dagger (kila) will
make its mark, and there will be great
while there will be haunted beams within
die painfully the grandfather will be
the house, delight in travelling, and
white complexioned and continue
ups and downs, afflictions due to
exposed knives.
widowhood, the spirit lords of the soil
will be displeased and there will be
drowning, or serious cold disorders,
great appetite, or blurred vision.
to experience great ups and downs.
auspicious corpses (bkra), widowhood
and oppression by the treacherous
spirits of affliction ('phung-sr).
the stream of a great river will appear,
the sky and the ocean depths will move
a black man will come riding a black
the foremost leader of the four or eight
into the atmosphere, and from the snow
demonic horse and leading a black
and the foremost of attachment
classes of serpentine spirits will be agitated,
The actual predicted results
based on the numeric squares
governing the hour of divination
are as follows (dus-rme dngos-
'bras)
mountain peaks a voice will be heard
demonic dog, while a black demonic
spirits (bsen-mo) will haunt a verdant
and the sap of the trees in a verdant meadow
bird soars through the air, saying, 'If
well-watered meadow, with copses
saying, 'You are responsible for
providing my share of food! If you do
of trees interspersed, a carnivorous
will slowly well up like a spring of water due
to Bon or Buddhist rites, all the assembled
serpentine or plague-causing spirits
not sustain us, there will be vertigo
you do not provide my food-offering,
misfortunes will afflict those around
you, a corpse will be cast into your hands,
and primordial bewitchers (ye-'brog) will
and pains of the upper part of the body.'
piśācīor a treacherous female
oath-breaking spirit (dam-sri-mo) of the
wilderness will ask you for their crops,
(klu-gnyan) will charge you, saying, 'lf our
share of food is not provided, you will suffer
suddenly be sent forth.'
saying, 'If you do not provide them,
all sorts of ailments due to serpentine spirits,
there will be physical disabilities.'
such as dropsy.



277
The impact of the hour of divination
མི་སས་ཆས་
ན།
gascağı biar
Yellow 5
White 6
Red 7
White 8
Red 9
Black 2
Red 7
there will be five generations but the family
there will be growth at first which eventually
when divinations are made concerning
when divinations are made concerning
there will be five or two generations disliked
by the spirit lords of the soil, Bon, Buddhist
there will be family deaths due to nodes
or tumours, hypocritical speech with bad
there will be an adult family member who
dies accidentally though he or she has
line will have a maternal uncle who dies of
turns into poverty, wealth will be spent as
physical marks in particular, Black 2
physical marks in particular, Red 7 is the
or educated families, or by ordained
intentions, and cattle will be afflicted
accidental injuries, and there will be
no wound or weapon, and the house
it is made, and prosperity will be diminished
is the numeric square used for divining
numeric square used for divining the
renunciates, while the spirit lords of the
by demons.
afflictions due to klu-btsan spirits, disasters
will be moved to another region.
and lost to wealthy outsiders.
the physical marks of women.
physical marks of men.
soil will cause affliction from the sectors
caused by overcooking food, and red-
of land and house.
complexioned and noisy persons with moles.
there will be medicinal herbs from the snow
there will be a red man riding a red horse
mountains, the slate mountains, the grass-
and leading a red dog, while a red bird
soars in the sky. He will hold a red bow and
Pehar, lord of the treasure of the doctrine, will
appear, along with other wealth protectors,
a yellow complexioned hostile god (dgra-Iha)
and a plague-causing protector of the
there will be a woman riding a red mule, and
the oath-bound protectors of the Buddhist
teachings, coming from the eight renowned
charnel grounds of ancient India, cutting off
lands and rivers, and a lake-dwelling mermaid
(sman-mo), riding a doe, will confer with a
arrow, with tiger- and leopard-skin quivers,
the spirit lords of the locality, of canals, field
borders, ponds and houses will appear,
saying, 'My timely supplicatory prayers
have been interrupted! Many countryside
deities have conferred and if you continue
to interrupt our share of food-offerings,
then frost, fires, blight and famine will
afflict the land, cattle will be infected with
saying, 'All the haunting spirit (btsan)
wilderness, saying, 'My treasure has been
the life of those who violate their spiritual
multitude of snow mountain goddesses
(brtan-ma), saying, 'If you do not provide
retainers have conferred, and all of them
lost to another. Now, we have come to
my share of food, various diseases will
ask you to provide their share of food,
find it, and we are presently asking you for
afflict human beings, cattle and those
otherwise there will be knife fights and
our share of food. If you do not provide it,
commitments. The deity sMug-mo 'bum-gyi
d pon-mo and many female demons will
come to request their food, saying, 'If you do
not provide our share of food, your father
and siblings will be afflicted by contagious
plague, and human beings will be prone
around you.'
wounds.'
there will be madness, diseases due to
to podagra and rheumatism.'
king spirits, and combined heart and
wind disorders.'
diseases.



278
The White Beryl
Plate 21, fig. 6
བཞི་ས་རུ་ཚ་
རབས་ཆད་
ཐེ་ཚད་ ཚོར་
ཕར་བཅད་
6
བཅད་ཚད་
༥༦
སོར་ རྒྱུང་དང་ས་བདག་
གཅི་ས་མཁྱི་ཡས་
aph6jp༠)»r
lo)་ཁྱེདs a)
ཚpppsp
Ju
མ་པ་ཁང་གི་ར་གས་
ཉོ་བར་ད་ལན་གྱི་
ཚར་བཅད་འཐད་
་གྲས་ས་ཡིས་
༥
ཅུག ངས་
དང་ས་ལྷ་སངས་
j
jpj2jpoppainon
eji pjp>
)%i༥ལ༠jor
/ jཉིདwitgo»༧
ཡོད་མེད་
ཡོདི་ གྲ་ཡང་
མཤར་རྟ་སངས་
གནད་དེ་ཡོད་
བཏནས་
བཅད་ཡ་མོར་
ང་ འཁྱོག་འཐོར
བཛྲ་འཆན་འཚར6
ང་འཚར་ མ་ ཚར་
ངས་སྟན་གཅིག་པར་
གཞན་མ་
ཕ་འཕྲོ་མིད་
ཊ་
པ)n1
ཕྱིར་གཅོད་
ཚོར་བསྐྱིད་བདu
རྒྱ་རྨན་ཆུའམ་ཚུ?v
ཡང་གང་སར་བྱ་
བ་ན་ས་སྲངོ་མ་ནི་ཞེས་
elenoosipjའ|
/pi
656ya jia) 1༠ ་
g1p«་བa
% 5
Hop
ཁ/8Tཆ0»
கொம
ilཅད་དs hp
སྐjpལ་
د ا مرار
Numeric square divination affecting three generations
(sme-ba gsum-bsdebs; White Beryl, f. 435a/b)
Here, the numeric square governing the day of the divination is placed at the centre of the chart, with the other eight numeric squares
sequentially forming a circle around it, as indicated on Supplementary Plate 21, fig. 6. The first sector is therefore in the centre, the sec-
ond in the east, the third in the south-east, the fourth in the south, the fifth in the south-west, the sixth in the west, the seventh in the
north-west, the eighth in the north and the ninth in the north-east. The numeric squares positioned in these various sectors are then
compared with the numeric square governing the year of divination, and the elemental-relationship thus formed determines whether the
prognosis for the day in question is auspicious or not.
Among them, when the numeric square in the first sector is compared, it determines whether good deities (lha-
bzang) are present or absent. If the numeric square is in a mother-relationship to the numeric square governing the year of the divination,
the good deities are said to be present, but if it is in a friend-relationship harmful spirits are present, while other readings are neutral, sug-
gesting that neither gods nor evil spirits are present. When the numeric square in the second sector is compared, it determines whether
the subject's father, grandfather and great-grandfather will have a family line that comes to an end, or suffer fatal injuries. Such misfor-
tunes are said to emerge if the numeric square in this sector inhibits the numeric square governing the year of divination, but not if the
numeric square governing the year inhibits the numeric square of the sector.
When the numeric square in the third sector is compared, it determines whether the subject's mother, grand-
mother and great-grandmother will suffer from pollution or widowhood. Such misfortunes may arise if the numeric square of this third
sector inhibits the numeric square governing the day of divination, but not if the reverse is the case.
When the numeric square of the fourth sector is compared, it determines whether the subject's children, grand-
children and great-grandchildren will eventually have a family line that comes to an end. Such an outcome may ensue if the numeric
square of this sector inhibits the numeric square governing the year, which is the subject of the divination, but not if the reverse is the case.
When the numeric square of the fifth sector is compared, it determines whether the house, land and tombs will be
disliked by serpentine spirits and spirit lords of the soil. Such an outcome may ensue if the numeric square of the fifth sector inhibits that
governing the year, but not if the reverse is the case.



279
The impact of the hour of divination
Plate 21, fig. 6 (Ms II: ff. 25–26): Numeric square divination affecting
South When the numeric square of the fourth (south) sector is
compared, it determines whether the subject's children, grandchildren
three generations (sme-ba gsum-bsdebs; White Beryl, f. 435a/b)
and great-grandchildren will eventually have a family line that comes to
an end. Such an outcome may ensue if the numeric square of this sector
inhibits the numeric square governing the year, which is the subject of
the divination, but not if the reverse is the case (bzhi-pa bu-tsha yang
gsum-sar rabs-chad mi-chadl tshur-bcad chadl phar-bcad mi-phyed).
South-west When the numeric square of the fifth (south-west)
South-east When the numeric square in the third (south-east)
sector is compared, it determines whether the subject's mother,
sector is compared, it determines whether the house, land and tombs
grandmother and great-grandmother will suffer from harm or
will be disliked by serpentine spirits (nāga)® and spirit lords of the soil.
Such an outcome may ensue if the numeric square of the fifth sector
inhibits that governing the year, but not if the reverse is the case (Inga-
widowhood. Such misfortunes may arise if the numeric square of this
third sector inhibits the numeric square governing the day of divination,
but not if the reverse is the case (gsum-pa ma-phyi yang gsum-sar
gnod-yugs phog ma-phog tshur-gcod phog phar-gcod ma-'phog).
pa khang-zhing dur-gsum-sar klu/rgyud-dang sa-bdag 'gras ma-
grastshur-bcad 'gras phar-bcad ma-'gras).
East When the numeric square in the second (east) sector is
Centre When the numeric square in the first (central) sector is
West When the numeric square of the sixth (west) sector is
compared, it determines whether the subject's father, grandfather and
compared, it determines whether good pure deities (Iha-bzang) are
compared, it determines whether siblings, paternal cousins
great-grandfather will have a family line that comes to an end, or
present or absent. If the numeric square is in a mother-relationship to
and maternal cousins suffer new blood feuds or domestic strife. Such
suffer fatal injuries. Such misfortunes are said to emerge if the
the numeric square governing the year of the divination, the good
an outcome may ensue if the numeric square of this sector inhibits the
numeric square in this sector inhibits the numeric square governing
deities are said to be present, but if it is in a friend-relationship,
the year of divination, but not if the numeric square governing the year
numeric square governing the year, but not if the reverse is the case
(drug-pa spun-gsum gsar-dme 'khrug 'chor mi-'chorl phar-bcad
'chorl tshur-bcad mi-'chor).
harmful spirits are present, while other readings are neutral,
suggesting that neither gods nor evil spirits are present (dang-po lha-
sangs yod-medi ma-shar lha-sangs yodl grogs-shar gnod-'dre yodl
inhibits the numeric square of the sector (gnyis-pa pha-mes yang
gsum-sar rab-chad grir-shi 'byung ma-byungl tshur-gcod byung
phar-gcod ma-byung).
gzhan-la btang-snyoms lha-'dre med).
North-east When the numeric square of the eighth (north-east)
North-west When the numeric square of the seventh (north-west)
sector is compared, it determines whether the residences of sisters,
sector is compared, it determines whether maternal uncles, great-
uncles and great-great-uncles will have their discussions interrupted
brothers or their children will be harmed or not. Such an outcome
or not. Such an outcome may ensue if the numeric square of this
may ensue if the numeric square of this sector enhances the numeric
sector inhibits that numeric square governing the year, but not if the
square governing the year, but not if it inhibits the numeric square
governing the year (bdun-pa msring-mo no-no yang gsum-sar bu-
reverse is the case (brgyad-pa zhang gsum-sar gros-lam chad ma-
chadl tshur gcod chadl phar-gcod ma-chad).
sring klungs-mal tshugs ma-tshugs/ tshur-bskyed tshugs/ tshur-gcod
ma-tshugs).
North When the numeric square of the ninth (north) sector is
compared, it determines whether daughters, granddaughters or
great-granddaughters will get divorced or not. Such an outcome may
ensue if the numeric square of this sector inhibits the numeric square
governing the year, but not if the reverse is the case (dgu-pa bu-mo
tsha-mo yang gsum-sar sgyed-bu bye-bral byed mi-byedi tshur-
good byed phar-gcod mi-byed).
When the numeric square of the sixth sector is compared, it determines whether siblings, paternal cousins and maternal cousins will
suffer new blood feuds or domestic strife. Such an outcome may ensue if the numeric square of this sector inhibits the numeric square
governing the year, but not if the reverse is the case.
When the numeric square of the seventh sector is compared, it determines whether the residence of a sister,
brother, nephew or niece is harmed or not. Such an outcome may ensue if the numeric square of this sector enhances the numeric square
governing the year, but not if it inhibits it.
When the numeric square of the eighth sector is compared, it determines whether maternal uncles, great uncles
and great-great-uncles will have their discussions interrupted or not. Such an outcome may ensue if the numeric square of this sector
inhibits that numeric square governing the year, but not if the reverse is the case.
Lastly, when the numeric square of the ninth sector is compared, it determines whether daughters, granddaugh-
ters or great-granddaughters will get divorced or not. Such an outcome may ensue if the numeric square of this sector inhibits the
numeric square governing the year, but not if the reverse is the case. Now, when the numeric squares are inspected, there may also be
concomitant discernible omens, which have their own divinatory functions, as depicted on Supplementary Plate 21, fig. 4. For example,
under White One the presence of a king spirit at the gate of the house will determine whether the subject's own situation will improve or
not. Under Black Two, the presence of wealth or property at the gate will determine whether the subject will be happy or not. Under Blue
Three, the presence of an aspect of growth or decline at the gate will determine whether the subject will be possessed by a malign goblin
(the'u-brang) or not. Under Green Four, the presence of suffering at the gate will determine whether the subject will be auspicious or not.
Under Yellow Five, the presence of a dust storm at the gate will determine whether the subject incurs losses or not. Under White Six, the
presence of a pine-tree at the gate will determine whether the subject has many siblings or not. Under Red Seven, the presence of a
Buddhist monk at the gate will determine whether the subject will belong to an inauspicious family or not. Under White Eight, the pres-
ence of a wild enemy at the gate will determine whether king spirits and bewitchers will possess the subject or not; and under Red Nine,
the presence of butchery at the gate will determine whether friendly swords will be drawn or not.



280
The White Beryl
Opposite Detail of Plate 10, fig. 6 (see p. 283), showing predictions for
household, land and tomb sectors when the subject's elements inhibit
and enhance those governing the hour of divination
Furthermore, the nine numeric squares may also coincide with the following nine negative sectors (sa-dgu), as indicated on
Supplementary Plate 21, fig. 4. White One coincides with the sector in which the father loses his homeland, known as “heavenly and
earthly misfortune'. Black Two coincides with the sector of widowhood, known as the 'young ox carrying a corpse'. Blue Three coincides
with the sector of divorce, known as the ‘minor disaster'. Green Four coincides with the sector of afflictions due to serpentine and plague-
causing spirits, known as the 'hidden chart of the serpentine spirits’. Yellow Five coincides with the sector of the death-wish, known as
the corpse'. White Six coincides with the sector of separation from divine and spirit mediums, known as the ‘palace of medicine”. Red
Seven coincides with the sector of fighting between gods and ogres, known as the 'mirror of blood’ White Eight coincides with the sector
frequented by king spirits, known as the “intermediary between gods and humans'; and Red Nine coincides with the sector of prosperity
for humans and cattle, known as the 'storehouse of wealth'. In all such negative cases, luck and prosperity must be ritually attracted, and
it is important to sharpen the arrow of awareness.
pisicaniques tantsbur
arat
ཀྱ་
Wotal
Plate 21, fig. 4
Green 4
Yellow 5
White 6
Red 7
White 8
Red 9
Plate 21, fig. 4 (Ms II: ff. 25–29): Divinations concerning nine visible omens and so forth (White Beryl, f. 435b)
Divinations concerning nine visible omens and so forth (mthong-mig-dgu sogs-pa'i rtsis)
Numeric square (rme-ba) White 1
Black 2
Blue 3
Nine visible omens
the presence of a king spirit the presence of wealth or the presence of an aspect
(mthong-mig dgu) at the gate will determine property at the gate will of growth or decline at the
whether the subject's own determine whether the gate will determine whether
the presence of suffering
the presence of a dust storm
the presence of a pine-tree
the presence of a wild enemy
the presence of butchery at the
the presence of a Buddhist
monk at the gate will
at the gate will determine
at the gate will determine
at the gate will determine
at the gate will determine
gate will determine whether
whether the subject will be
whether the subject incurs
whether the subject has
determine whether the
friendly swords will be drawn
situation will improve or not
subject will be happy or not.
auspicious or not.
losses or not.
many siblings or not.
subject will belong to an
whether king spirits and
bewitchers will possess the
subject or not.
the subject will be possessed
by a malign goblin (the'u-
or not.
inauspicious family or not.
Nine sectors (sa-dgu)
the sector in which the father
the sector of widowhood,
brang) or not.
the sector of divorce, known
as the minor disaster.
the sector of afflictions due
the sector of the death -
the sector of fighting between
the sector frequented by king
the sector of prosperity for
the sector of the separation
from divine and spirit
loses his homeland, known
known as the young ox
to serpentine and plague -
wish, known as the corpse.
gods and ogres, known as
spirits, known as the
humans and cattle, known as
the storehouse of wealth.
as heavenly and earthly
carrying a corpse.
causing spirits, known as
mediums, known as the
the mirror of blood.
intermediary between gods
misfortune.
the hidden chart of the
palace of medicine.
and humans.
serpentine spirits.
The implementation of techniques pertaining to the hour of divination
All such predictions of past and future signs are explained in order to generate faith and respect for the divinatory process itself. It is
important to know the element governing the hour of divination (bya-ra), the body element of the subject (byed-yor), and their two corre-
sponding vitality elements (thig-sdod). These elements may be recognised once the aforementioned ‘kingly' and ‘ministerial pebbles rep-
resenting the year and month have been placed in the divination of natal horoscope. 1° Each of the five elements representing the hour and
the subject will suggest a distinctive prediction, depending on the type of divination that is applied: natal horoscope, marriage, obstacle
year, ill-health or death. In this way it is possible to determine by a process of elective divination the appropriate days or hours for mar-
riage, travel, construction projects, moving house, business, agriculture, haircuts, medical treatment or funerals.'' Here, the analysis and
fluctuations of growth and decline relevant to each of these elemental combinations will be calculated according to the three sectors of
the household, land, and tomb (khang-sa zhing-sa dur-sa gsum), as well as the sector of the relatives (nye-ba'i sa) and the six following
themes: resources (longs-spyod), diseases (nad), contributory dietary causes (lan-rkyen-gi mi-zas), demons (gdon), hairstyle (skra) and phys-
ical marks (sha-mtshan). These are all depicted on Plates 9–10.



SER
G
AM
SRE
P Jam 16
MORE



282
The White Beryl
Plate 10, fig. 6 (Msi: f. 47): Prognostications concerning growth and decline based on the inimical, friendly and identity-relationships between the subject's elements and those of the hour of divination with reference to the sectors of household, land and tomb (White Beryl, ff. 436a-437a)
Name of sector that is the starting point for divination
Household sector
Land sector
Tomb sector
(skor-'go'i ming)
(khang-sa)
(zhing-sa)
(dur-sa)
Readings in which the elements of the hour of divination
The household sector in which the vitality element of the divination hour inhibits The land sector in which the destiny element of the hour of divination inhibits The tomb sector in which the luck elements fire and water meet (klung-rta me-chu
inhibit the subject's elements
the subject's vitality element (dus-tshod srog brtsi-bya'i srog bcad-pa'i khang-sa) the subject's destiny element (dus-tshod dbang-thang-gis brtsi-bya'i
'phrad-pa'i dur-sa bstan-pa) 12 portends that the tomb will be located at the
portends that the house will have structural cracks or its inhabitants and property dbang-thang bcad-pa'i zhing-sa) portends that the fields will be punctured by junction of a mountain and a plain, but because the defects of the tomb impact upon
will be afflicted by spirit lords of the soil, inducing mental problems and
rocks, hills and boulders, and serpentine spirits will cause affliction. If the spirit
the plain, this causes disharmony at home. It will be auspicious if the uplands
carelessness, for which reasons it will be best to move house.
lords of the soil are not contained, someone will become lame.
have white snow with little water and rocky hills, but inauspicious if the sound of an
owl is heard, but even an excellently endowed tomb will bring sorrow due to conflict
with guilty living relatives.
The tomb sector in which the luck elements iron and wood meet (klung-rta Icags-
Readings in which the subject's elements inhibit the elements
of the hour of divination
The household sector in which the subject's vitality element inhibits the vitality
of the hour of divination (brtsi-bya'i srog-gis dus srog-bcad-pa'i khang-sa)
portends that if a house which has been made smaller or enlarged, or had its
The land sector in which the subject's destiny element inhibits the destiny
element of the hour of divination (brtsi-bya'i dbang-thang-gis dus-tshod
dbang-thangb cad-pas zhing-sa) portends that there will be prosperity and
shing 'phrad-pa'i dur-sa bstan-pa) portends that there will be both old and recent
fractures of the tombs, so that they will not be fully covered by their plinths, and they
door moved, is still untrustworthy, it is important to move out.
an excellent livelihood.
The household sector in which the subject's vitality element enhances the vitality
The land sector in which the subject's destiny element enhances the destiny
Readings in which the subject's elements enhance the elements
of the hour of divination
will be desecrated, casting the eye of death upon the living.
The tomb sector in which the luck elements iron and fire meet (klung-rta Icags me
'phrad-pa'i dur-sa) portends that the tombs will be located beside the household,
element of the hour of divination (brtsi-bya'i dbang-thang-gis dus-dbang
of the hour of divination (brtsi-bya'i srog-gis dus-tshod skyed-pas khang-sa)
portends that when a house has been repaired and cracks again appear, it will
bskyed-pa'i zhing-sa) portends that there will be a stūpa on a hillside, or else
so that the ancestral spirits will be disturbed in such a polluted and bewitched
be coveted by those desiring much wealth, and even though it may have a
a cavern, and if the spirit lords of the soil and serpentine spirits are not tended,
environment where noises are heard, and odours are smelled. However, if there is
thousand inhabitants and a thousand horses it will still run the risk of destruction.
infectious skin diseases will ensue.
not much activity near the tombs, they will be well-disposed, eliminating obstacles
between mother and child and death-wishes. If the tombs are well maintained in this
manner, the living relatives will be at peace.
The land sector in which the destiny element of the hour of divination enhances
Readings in which the elements of the hour of divination enhance
the subject's elements
The household sector in which the vitality element of the hour of divination
enhances the subject's vitality element (dus-tshod Srog-gis brtsi-bya'i srog
The tomb sector of the six inauspicious factors in which the growth and decline
sectors of the luck element are conjoined with the hour of divination (klung-rta'i dar-
the subject's destiny element (dus-dbang-gis brtsi-bya'i dbang-thang bskyed-
bskyed-pa'i khang-sa) portends that the house will be auspicious, replete with
pas zhing-sa) portends that the fields will be most excellent. If the fields are sold
gud dus-dang sbyar-ba'i ngan-drug dur-sa) portends that a travelling companion will
people and property, while a hundred good things will be conferred on its owner,
all assets will be lost but if they are maintained, they will confer wealth.
become hostile.
and a hundred bad things on others.
The tomb sector in which the luck elements of the subject and the hour of divination
Readings in which the subject's elements and those of the hour
of divination have an identity-relationship of wood
The household sector in which the vitality elements of the subject and the hour
of divination indicate a meeting of wood (brtsi-bya'i srog-dang dus-srog shing-
nang 'phrad-pa'i khang-sa) portends that if a corpse is not removed losses will be
The land sector in which the destiny elements of the subject and the hour of
divination indicate a meeting of wood (dbang-gnyis shing 'phrad-pa'l zhing-sa)
portends that the fields will be oblong with outcrops of fruit trees. It will be a haunt
indicate a meeting of wood (klung gnyis shing-nang 'phrad-pas dur-sa) portends that
the tombs will be located at a junction of mountain and plain, but if the skulls are
incurred due to enemies and thieves, while treacherous spirits of fire and water
of serpentine and plague-causing spirits, which should not be damaged because
partially lost the relatives will become hostile, the ancestors will be separated from
will arise, bringing the risk that the house will be filled with child corpses.
lameness or paralysis will ensue. It will help if a gtor-ma offering is made on behalf
their snow-guardian, which will turn into a dog, and a headless torso, will emerge,
of serpentine spirits.
saying, 'Your happiness and my sorrow will become confused!
Readings in which the subject's elements and those of the hour
The household sector in which the vitality elements of the subject and the hour
The tomb sector in which the luck elements of the subject and the hour of divination
of divination have an identity-relationship of fire
of divination indicate a meeting of fire (rtsi-bya-dang dus-srog me-nang
The land sector in which the destiny elements of the subject and the hour of
divination indicate a meeting of fire (dbang-klung me-nang 'phrad-kyi zhing-sa)
portends that the fields will provide all necessities, so they should be kept and
'phrad-kyi khang-sa) portends that household matters will be balanced,
indicate a meeting of fire (klung-rta me-nang 'phrad-kyi dur-sa) portends that the
tombs will be located in a red valley with a black gorge containing a few trees, but the
paternal relatives will be disrupted because the corpse of an illegitimate daughter will
have been entombed, causing the essence of the elements to be depleted, and
remaining unchanged.
not sold.
questioning the happiness of the living.
Readings in which the subject's elements and those of the hour
of divination have an identity-relationship of water
The household sector in which the vitality elements of the subject and the hour
of divination indicate a meeting of water (brtsi-bya-dang dus-srog chu-nang
'phrad-kyi khang-sa) portends that wealth and food will be obtained overseas,
The land sector in which the destiny elements of the subject and the hour of The tomb sector in which the luck elements of the subject and the hour of divination
divination indicate a meeting of water (dbang-thang chu-nang 'phrad-kyi zhing-sa) indicate a meeting of water (klung-rta chu-nang 'phrad-kyi dur-sa) portends that
portends that there will be a concealed square hole, a stagnant spring, and there will be dangers to the tombs due to pools and water and they will be visited by
afflictions such as dropsy and ailments of the lumbar region will be caused by someone with dropsy, for which reason the paternal ancestors will censure with the
klu-srin spirits and lake-dwelling mermaids (mtsho-sman), for which reasons words, 'This iron axe will become a demon afflicting iron! This goat-hair slingshot will
the gZungs-bsdud klu-'bum should be recited many times and the mtsho-sman- eventually become a demon afflicting goats! This able-bodied invalid will eventually
the house will be most powerful, cattle will flourish, and children will thrive.
thread-cross should be made.
become a demon afflicting the tombs!'
The household sector in which the vitality elements of the subject and the hour
The land sector in which the destiny elements of the subject and the hour of
Readings in which the subject's elements and those of the hour
of divination have an identity-relationship of iron
of divination indicate a meeting of iron (brtsi-bya-dang dus-srog Icags-nang
The tomb sector in which the luck elements of the subject and the hour of divination
indicate a meeting of iron (klung-rta Icags-nang 'phrad-kyi dur-sa) portends that the
burial site will be white in colour, and marked by a white cairn. The polluting ghosts of
'phrad-kyi khang-sa) portends that it will be auspicious if the house is deserted,
for enemies will arise against children and property, spirit lords of the soil and
plague-causing spirits will ingress, wealth will be dissipated, like a bubbling brook
divination indicate a meeting of iron (dbang-thang Icags-nang 'phrad-kyi zhing
-sa) portends that the fields will be semi-circular, and frequented by serpentine
and klu-sman spirits, causing podagra and bone diseases, so that it will help if
they are contained.
murder victims (gre-bo) will ingress and the paternal ancestors will bring censure
saying that just as the hide of horses or donkeys and fish are dissimilar, so these
evaporating, the body will be smitten by diseases, like a tree by sand, and the
polluting spirits and the tombs are incompatible.
bodily constituents will decay, as in the onset of old age.
The household sector in which the vitality elements of the subject and the hour
The land sector in which the destiny elements of the subject and the hour of
The tomb sector in which the rear of the tomb faces the direction corresponding to the
Readings in which the subject's elements and those of the hour
of divination have an identity-relationship of earth
divination indicate a meeting of earth (brtsi-bya'i dbang-thang-dang dus-srog
element of the hour of divination (dus-tshod-kyi khams mthun-la dur-rgyab gtad-
of divination indicate a meeting of earth (brtsi-bya-dang dus-srog sa-nang
'phrad-kyi khang-sa) portends that eczema and other infectious skin diseases
lugs) portends that all will be well, as when the hour is that of the wood element and
will be caused by spirit lords of the soil and treacherous oath-breaking spirits
sa-nang 'phrad-kyi zhing-sa) portends that the fields will resemble intestines,
and they will be frequented by other spirit lords of the soil who will cause chronic
ailments and leprosy, for which reason the heart-mantra of Vajrapāņi
the rear of the tomb faces east.
(dam-sri), so that a water libation should be offered. Otherwise all will be
exhausted, and the subject should move house.
should be recited.



283
The impact of the hour of divination
B
AGNI
251
བཅད་པའི་ཁར་
སདདས་ཚར་
དབSའང་བ
ཐད་བཟང་པགས་
Veza 2-VUAVIVAVAV
Prognostications concerning growth and decline based on the enemy-, friend- and identity-relationships formed between the subject's
elements and those of the hour of divination, with reference to the sectors of household, land and tomb (White Beryl, ff. 436a-437a)
The three sectors of the household (khang-sa), land (zhing-sa) and tomb (dur-sa) are depicted on Plate 10, fig. 6. As far as the household
sector (khang-sa) is concerned: the household sector in which the vitality element of the divination hour inhibits the subject's vitality ele-
Plate 10, fig. 6
ment portends that the house will have structural cracks or its inhabitants and property will be afflicted by spirit lords of the soil, induc-
ཞིང་ས། དུར་ས།།
ing mental problems and carelessness, for which reasons it will be best to move house. Similarly, the household sector in which the sub-
ject's vitality element inhibits the vitality element of the hour of divination portends that if a house which has been made smaller or
enlarged, or had its door moved, is still untrustworthy, it is important to move out. The household sector in which the subject's vitality
element enhances the vitality element of the hour of divination portends that when a house has been repaired and cracks again appear, it
will be coveted by those desiring much wealth, and even though it may have a thousand inhabitants and a thousand horses it still runs the
risk of destruction. The household sector in which the vitality element of the hour of divination enhances the subject’s vitality element
portends that the house will be auspicious, replete with people and property, while a hundred good things will be conferred on its owner,
པརྟན་པ།།
and a hundred bad things on others.
Similarly, the household sector in which the vitality elements of the subject and the hour of divination indicate a
meeting of wood portends that if a corpse is not removed losses will be incurred due to enemies and thieves, while treacherous spirits of
fire and water (me-sri-dang chu-sri)19 will arise, bringing the risk that the house will be filled with child corpses. The household sector in
གོས་དུས8 ཕྱི
which the vitality elements of the subject and the hour of divination indicate a meeting of fire portends that the situation will be balanced,
I SEN
LAITTEET
remaining unchanged. The household sector in which the vitality elements of the subject and the hour of divination indicate a meeting of
དརས་བསན
water portends that wealth and food will be obtained overseas, the house will be most powerful, cattle will flourish, and children will
thrive. The household sector in which the vitality elements of the subject and the hour of divination indicate a meeting of iron portends
that it will be auspicious if the house is deserted, for enemies will arise against children and property, spirit lords of the soil and plague-
causing spirits will ingress, wealth will be dissipated, like a bubbling brook evaporating, the body will be smitten by diseases, like a tree
by sand, and the bodily constituents will decay, as in the onset of old age. Lastly, the household sector in which the vitality elements of the
subject and the hour of divination indicate a meeting of earth portends that eczema and other infectious skin diseases will be caused by
spirit lords of the soil and treacherous oath-breaking spirits (dam-sri), so that a water libation should be offered. Otherwise all will be
exhausted, and the subject should move house.
0000
As far as the land sector (zhing-sa) is concerned: the land sector in which the destiny element of the hour of divina-
tion inhibits the subject's destiny element portends that the fields will be punctured by rocks, hills and boulders, and serpentine spirits
ས་དུས་དབང་
will cause affliction. If the spirit lords of the soil are not contained, the subject will become lame. The land sector in which the subject's
དབང་ཕྱང་
BACK maana annat
destiny element inhibits the destiny element of the hour of divination portends that there will be prosperity and an excellent livelihood.
The land sector in which the subject's destiny element enhances the destiny element of the hour of divination portends that there will be a
stūpa on a hillside, or else a cavern, and if the spirit lords of the soil and serpentine spirits are not tended, infectious skin diseases will
ensue. The land sector in which the destiny element of the hour of divination enhances the subject's destiny element portends that the
fields will be most excellent. If the fields are sold all assets will be lost, but if they are maintained, they will confer wealth.
Sales
The land sector in which the destiny elements of the subject and the hour of divination indicate a meeting of wood
portends that the fields will be oblong with outcrops of fruit trees. They will become a haunt of serpentine spirits and plague-causing
འཕྲད་པས
spirits, which should not be damaged because lameness or paralysis will ensue. It will help if a gtor-ma offering is made on behalf of ser-
pentine spirits. The land sector in which the destiny elements of the subject and the hour of divination indicate a meeting of fire portends
that the fields will provide all necessities, so they should be retained and not sold. The land sector in which the destiny elements of the
subject and the hour of divination indicate a meeting of water portends that there will be a concealed square hole, a stagnant spring, and
འཕྲར་སྤྱི་ཁ
ས་དབར་གླེང་
afflictions – such as dropsy and ailments of the lumbar region - will be caused by klu-srinl4 and lake-dwelling mermaids (mtsho-sman), for
which reasons the gZungs-bsdud klu-'bum should be recited many times and the mtsho-sman thread-cross should be made. The land sector
གྱི་ཞིང་ས་
དུར་ས།
in which the destiny elements of the subject and the hour of divination indicate a meeting of iron portends that the fields will be semi-cir-
cular, and frequented by serpentine spirits and klu-sman spirits,15 causing podagra and bone diseases, so that it will help if they are con-
tained. Lastly, the land sector in which the destiny elements of the subject and the hour of divination indicate a meeting of earth portends
that the fields will resemble intestines, and they will be frequented by other spirit lords of the soil who will cause chronic ailments and
དུས་སྤོག་
ཚུ་ནང་འཕྲད་
leprosy, for which reason the heart-mantra of Vajrapāņi should be recited.
གྱི་ཁད་ས་
As far as the tomb sector (dur-sa) is concerned: the tomb sector in which the luck elements fire and water meet
དབང་ཀླུང་
portends that the tomb will be located at the junction of a mountain and a plain, but because the defects of the tomb impact upon the plain,
ཀྱི་ཞིང་ས་
this will cause disharmony at home. It will be auspicious if the uplands have white snow with little water and rocky hills, and inauspicious
if the sound of an owl is heard, but even an excellently endowed tomb will bring sorrow due to conflict with guilty living relatives. The
tomb sector in which the luck elements iron and wood meet portends that there will be both old and recent fractures of the tombs, so that
they will not be fully covered by their plinths, and they will be desecrated, casting the eye of death upon the living. The tomb sector in
ལྕགསནང་
which the luck elements iron and fire meet portends that the tombs will be located beside the household, so that the ancestral spirits will
ས་དུབར་སླར་
ལྕགས་
be disturbed in such a polluted and accursed environment where noises are heard, and odours are smelled. If there is not much activity
near the tombs, however, the ancestral spirits will be well disposed, eliminating obstacles between mother and child and death-wishes. If
ས་དུར་ས།
the tombs are well maintained in this manner, the living relatives will be at peace.
དེང་དུས་སློག
དུས་ཚོད།
The tomb sector of the six inauspicious factors in which the growth and decline sectors of the luck element are
ས་དང་འཕུར་
པས<ཐབས་
conjoined with the hour of divination portends that a travelling companion will become hostile. The tomb sector in which the luck ele-
ཁམས་ལ་
ནད་འཕྱུར་གྱི་
ments of the subject and the hour of divination indicate a meeting of wood portends that the tombs will be at a junction of mountain and
GAVER
plain, but if the skulls are partially lost the relatives will become hostile, the ancestors will be separated from their snowlion guardian,
གཏད་ཡོད།
which will turn into a dog, and a headless torso will emerge, saying, 'Your happiness and my sorrow will become confused! The tomb
sector in which the luck elements of the subject and the hour of divination indicate a meeting of fire portends that the tombs will be
ཛཱར་དུས་སོག་
ཤད་འཕྲད་པ་
སོག་མེན་
བཙོས་བྱ་དང
དུར་ས།
རུར་གྱི་རྒྱག
54°45KAT



284
The White Beryl
located in a red valley with a black gorge containing few trees, but the paternal relatives will be disrupted because the corpse of an illegit-
imate daughter will have been entombed, causing the essence of the elements to be depleted, and bringing into question the happiness of
the living. The tomb sector in which the luck elements of the subject and the hour of divination indicate a meeting of water portends that
there will be dangers to the tombs due to pools and water, and they will be visited by someone with dropsy, for which reason the paternal
ancestors will bring censure saying, “This iron axe will become a demon afflicting iron! This goat-hair slingshot will eventually become a
demon afflicting goats! This able-bodied invalid will eventually become a demon afflicting the tombs! The tomb sector in which the luck
elements of the subject and the hour of divination indicate a meeting of iron portends that the burial site will be white in colour, and
marked by a white cairn. The polluting ghosts of murder victims (gre-bo) will ingress and the paternal ancestors will censure with the
words, 'Just as the hide of horses or donkeys and fish are dissimilar, so these polluted spirits and the tombs are incompatible.' Lastly, the
tomb sector in which the rear of the tomb faces the direction corresponding to the element of the hour of divination portends that all will
be well, as when the hour is that of the wood element and the rear of the tomb faces east.
The sector of the relatives (White Beryl, f. 437 a/b)
When the sector of the relatives (nye-ba'i sa) is examined, the hour of divination is compared with the subject's destiny element, the
parental relative's vitality element, the maternal uncle's body element, the wife's element that is in a friend-relationship with her destiny
element, the lord's luck element, and the enemy's element that is in an enemy-relationship with any given element. When these are in
conflict, as when wood clashes with fire, or iron with water, the predicted results are similar to those given in the previous section. But
when there are no friend- or enemy-relationships, and the element of the relative in question is identical to that of the hour of divination,
it is said that the six auspicious sectors of growth are present, while those of decline are absent.
The chart on Plate 9, fig. 16, depicts the schematic locations of the five types of relative to be considered and
inspected when a relationship of identity occurs with the element of the hour of divination. Thus, when there is an identity-relationship of
wood, the paternal relatives, along with the maternal uncle and lord, are said to be in the east, the wife in one of the intermediate direc-
tions in a friend-relationship, and the enemy in the west in an enemy-relationship. When there is an identity-relationship of fire, the
paternal relatives and lord should be in the south, the maternal uncle in the east, the wife in the west, and the enemy in the north. When
there is an identity-relationship of earth, the paternal relatives should be in one of the intermediate directions, along with the maternal
uncle and the lord, while the wife should be in the north and the enemy in the east. When there is an identity-relationship of iron, the
paternal relatives should be in the west, along with the maternal uncle and lord, while the wife should be in the east and the enemy in the
south. Lastly, when there is an identity-relationship of the water element, the paternal relatives should be in the north, along with the
maternal uncle and lord, while the wife should be in the south, and the enemy in one of the intermediate directions.
་
་་
༄༅། པཚམཚམས། །
ཞང་པོ་མཚམས།
ྋསང་སྲེག་ལུས་ངབ་པ་བྱུང་། ༦
ཕཚནསྲོག་གི་ཕྱོགས། ། པ་ཚབར་
སྟེ།ཞང་པོ་ལུས་ཕྱོགས། ། ཞང་པོ་ཤར།
༢། ཁྱཉམི་དབང་གྲོགས་ཕྱོགས། ༄༅། ཁྱན་མེ་མཚམས།
བདརྗེདཔེན་ཀང་ཕྱོགས། ༄༅། སྤྱནར།
༈།ག་དབང་དགའ་ཕྱགས།
།ལན་ལེན་
༄། ཞངཔ་བར།
། བྱན་མིནབ།།
རྗེ་དབན་ལོ།
ཕ་ཚན་ནུ།
ཞཔ་པེ་ནུབ།།
བྱེན་མ་ཤར།
རྗེ་དཔོན་ནུབ།
དགྲ་ལྷོ།
པ་འོན་བྱར། །
ཞིང་པ་བྱང་
བྱན་མོ་སྟོད་
རྗེ་དབོན་བྱང།
དགོས།
བྱིནམ་བྱས་
རྗེ་དཔོན་མཚམས་
དགྲོཤར་
་་
，
ན
ངE
ས
པད་°
།
，
Plate 9, fig. 16
Plate 9, fig. 16 (Ms 1: ff. 39–41): Location of the five types of relative to be considered when the element of the hour of divination forms an identity-relationship with the vitality element of the paternal relatives (White Beryl, f. 437a/b)
wood
fire
earth
iron
water
paternal relatives in south
paternal relatives in west
paternal relatives in north
paternal relatives in east
(pha-tshan shan
paternal relatives in intermediate directions
(pha-tshan mtshams
(pha-tshan lho)
(pha-tshan nub)
(pha-tshan byang
maternal uncle in east
maternal uncle in east
maternal uncle in west
maternal uncle in north
maternal uncle in intermediate directions
(zhang-po mtshams)
(zhang-po shar)
(zhang-po nub)
(zhang-po byang)
Element of the vitality, body, destiny or luck aspects of the
hour of divination (dus-tshod Srog-lus dbang-klung 'byung)
Direction of the paternal relatives' vitality element
(pha-tshan srog-gi phyogs)
Direction of the maternal uncle's body element
(zhang-po lus-phyogs)
Direction in friend-relationship with wife's destiny element
(byen-mo dbang-grogs phyogs)
Direction of lord's luck element
(rje-dpon klung-phyogs)
Direction in enemy-relationship with enemy's destiny element
(dgra-dbang dgra'i phyogs)
(zhang-po sha0
wife in intermediate directions
(byan-mo mtshams)
wife in west
wife in north
wife in east
wife in south
(byan-mo nub)
(byan-mo byang)
(byan-mo shar)
(byan-mo lho)
lord in east
lord in south
lord in intermediate directions
lord in west
lord in north
(rje-dpon lho)
(rje-dpon mtshams
(rje-dpon nub)
(je-dpon byang
(rje-dpon shah
enemy in west
(dgra-nub 16
enemy in north
enemy in east
enemy in south
enemy in intermediate directions
(gra-mtshams)
(dgra-byang
(dgra-shan
(dgra-lho)



285
The impact of the hour of divination
Further examinations of the subject's attributes made dependent on the hour of divination (White Beryl, ff. 437b-438b)
When a comparison is actually made between the subject of divination and the element of the hour of divination, the examination may
focus on the subject's resources (longs-spyod brtag-pa), diseases (nad brtag-pa), contributory dietary causes of ill-health (lan-rkyen-gyi mi-
zas brtag-pa), demons (gdon brtag-pa), diets (zas brtag-pa), hairstyles (skra brtag-pa) and physical marks (sha-tshan brtag-pa), as illustrated
on Plate 10, fig. 5 (shown overleaf).
When the element governing the hour of divination is wood, the following resources are inspected: butter pots,
wooden baskets, donkeys, goats, sheep, and blue dogs. When the governing element is fire, the diviner should inspect copper pots and
red-coloured animals with cleft hooves, including horses. When it is earth, he should inspect yellow material objects, excellent fields, and
yellow or pale yellow dogs. When it is iron, he should inspect iron objects, silver or white metal objects, white cattle, sheep, dogs and
clothes; and when it is water he should inspect hair-blankets, dark-coloured objects, black cattle or horses and oxen, dogs, and so forth.
When the subject’s body and destiny elements are compared with those of the hour, growth is indicated if these
objects are present, and decline if they are absent; one should then refer to the appropriate predicted readings.
Similarly, when diseases prevalent during the present year are inspected, if the element governing the hour is
wood, one should expect to meet wind disorders and ailments of the channels, stomach, liver, eyes and right ribs. When it is fire, one
should expect to meet ailments of the heart, small intestine, agitated blood, tongue, upper part of the body, and neck, as well as conta-
gious fevers. When it is earth, one should expect to meet ailments of the stomach and spleen, obesity, flesh diseases, suppurating wounds,
pustules, nodes, nasal congestion, water diseases, colds and pains of the left arm. When it is iron, one should expect to meet ailments of
the lungs and tumours, bone diseases, earache, toothache, and pulmonary fevers. When it is water, one should expect to meet ailments
due to water, gallstones or uroliths, cold of the kidneys and lumbar region, or diseases of the knees, legs and urethra.
In addition, there is also an inspection of secondary or contributory dietary causes to ill-health. For example,
when the governing element is wood, one should inspect whether the subject has partaken of cooked vegetables, right-sided ribs, roasted
barley dough-balls, cream, or wine from the hand of a plague-causing spirit (gnyan), blacksmith, maternal uncle or carpenter, coming
from the east or west. When it is fire, one should inspect whether the subject has partaken of flesh of the shoulders or back, and weak wine
from the hand of a plague-causing spirit, sister, widow or widower's son, coming from the south or north. When it is earth one should
inspect whether the subject has partaken of bread or fatty meat, when served by an adobe maker or old woman, and brought by the hand
of a plague-causing spirit, an old woman, child, monk or guest, coming from the east or south-west. When it is iron, one should inspect
whether the subject has partaken of concentrated paste or flesh of the head, upper part of the body, or left-sided ribs, and white butter,
from the hand of a plague-causing spirit, maternal uncle, child, uncle, aunt, or a kinsman who is a potter or blacksmith, coming from the
south and west, or going towards the forge of a blacksmith. Lastly, if the governing element is water, one should inspect whether the sub-
ject has partaken of food from the hand of a plague-causing spirit, or from a widow, a black woman, or some such paternal household
member, coming from the north.
Then, when demons or demonic influences are inspected, if the governing element is wood one should look out
for malign goblins (the'u-brang), oath-breakers (dam-sri) and serpentine spirits who frequent wood and come from the east. If it is fire, one
should look out for haunting spirits, dropsy-causing spirits and rock-dwelling attachment spirits (bsen-mo) who haunt red-coloured
horses. If it is earth, one should look out for spirit lords of the soil, dge-bsnyen spirits?? and bewitchers who frequent yellowish locations or
hosts, including tawny-coloured animals, and come from the south-west or east. If it is iron one should look out for afflictions caused by
malevolent forces or king spirits; and if it is water one should look out for malevolent forces, oath-breakers and evil spirits of misfortune,
who haunt brooms, ropes and widows' property, in the north.
In all such cases of demonic affliction, appropriate counteracting measures should be employed, including the pre-
scribed rites of aversion, thread-crosses, and so forth. If, when the elements of the subject and the hour of divination are compared, the
former is inhibited by the latter, it portends that demonic afflictions must be removed, whereas if the former inhibits the latter all will be
well. If the former is enhanced by the latter the life-long companion gods ('go-lha) will be present, and if the reverse is the case there will
be harm caused by some demon or another, which has to be rectified by ritual means.
As for diet, there are divinations to be made concerning wine, as indicated on Supplementary Plate 21, fig. 5. First
there is the divination determining whether wine will be present or not (chang yod-med), according to which it is predicted that if the sub-
ject's body and destiny elements coincide with sectors of growth, there will be wine, but if they correspond to the sectors of decline there
will not be any wine. It may also be predicted that grain will have properly fermented if these elements coincide with the sectors of con-
ception, foetus, embryo or ablution. Also, properly strained wine will have been drunk if the hour of divination coincides with a subject
who has a male year-sign, unstrained wine if it coincides with a subject who has a female year-sign, and semi-strained wine if it coincides
with a subject who has a male year-sign and another who has a female year-sign.
It may then be predicted that wine will be offered if the body and destiny elements of the hour of divination inhibit
those of the subject, whereas it will not be offered if the body and destiny elements of the hour of divination enhance those of the subject,
and it will only partially be offered if the body and destiny elements of the subject inhibit or enhance those of the hour of divination.
Similarly, if the elements of the hour and the subject form identity-, mother- or friend-relationships, the wine will largely have a
beneficial effect, whereas if they form enemy-or adversarial relationships, it will have a harmful effect. Lastly, if the hour when the wine is
tasted is that of the wood element the wine will be unfermented (rengs-pa), if it is that of the fire element the wine will be sour, if it is that
of the earth element the wine will be astringent, if it is that of the iron element the wine will be sweet and if it is that of the water element
the wine will be weak and filtered.
5
.



286
The White Beryl
Plate 10, fig. 5 (Ms l: ff. 42–46): Further examinations of the subject's attributes made dependent on the hour of divination (White Beryl, ff. 437b-438b)
If the vitality, body, destiny and luck elements wood
of the hour of divination are respectively
fire
earth
iron
water
butter pots, wooden baskets, donkeys, goats,
copper pots, red-coloured animals with cleft
yellow material objects, excellent fields, yellow
(dus-tshod srog-lus dbang-klung)
the following resources are inspected
(longs-spyod brtag-pa)
the following diseases are inspected
(nad brtag-pa)
iron objects, silver or white metal objects, white
cattle, sheep, dogs and clothes
sheep, and blue dogs
hooves, including horses
and pale yellow dogs
hair-blankets, dark-coloured objects, black cattle
or horses and oxen, dogs, and so forth
ailments due to water, gallstones or uroliths, cold of the
kidneys and lumbar region, or diseases of the knees,
wind disorders and ailments of the channels,
ailments of the heart and small intestine, agitated
stomach, liver, eyes and right ribs (rlung-nad
ailments of the stomach, spleen, obesity, flesh
diseases, suppurating wounds, pustules, nodes,
nasal congestion, water diseases, colds, and pains
blood, the tongue, the upper part of the body, the
neck, as well as contagious fevers (snying-dang
rgyu-ma khrag-'khrugs Ice-ro-stod sked-mjing
ailments of the lungs, tumours, bone diseases,
earache, toothache and pulmonary fevers (glo-nad
skran rus-nad rna-ba so-nad glo-tshad na)
rtsa-rgyus pho-mchin mig-rtsib gYas-na)
legs and urethra (chu-nad rdel-nad mkhal-sked grang-
of the left arm (pho-mcher Ici-'thib sha-nad rma-shu
ba pus-mo rkang chu-so rna-ba na)
tsha-ba rims-nad)
phol-'bras sna-'gags chu-nad cham-pa lag-gyon
partaking of cooked vegetables, right-sided ribs,
partaking of food from the hand of a plague-causing
the following contributory dietary causes
of ill-health are inspected (lan-rkyen-gyi
mi-zas brtag-pa)
spirit, or from a widow, a black woman, or a some such
roasted barley dough-balls, cream, or wine from
the hand of a plague-causing spirit, blacksmith,
maternal uncle or carpenter, coming from the east
or west (shar-ram nub-nas gnyan-mgar-ba
zhang-po shing-bzo'i lag-nas sngo-tshod rtsib
partaking of the flesh of the shoulders or back, and
weak wine from the hand of a plague-causing spirit,
sister, widow or widower's son, coming from the
south or north (Iho'am byang-nas gnyan sring-mo
yugs-mo tsha yug-bu lag-nas gnya'-ba dal-sha
thug-zer nad)
partaking of bread or fatty meat, when served by an
old woman or adobe maker, and brought by the hand
of a plague-causing spirit, old woman, child, monk or
g uest, coming from the east or south-west (shar-ram
Iho-nub-kyi gnyan rgan-mo bu-tsha bandhe mgron-
partaking of concentrated paste or flesh of the head,
upper part of the body, or left-sided ribs, and white
butter, from [the hand of] a plague-causing spirit,
maternal uncle, child, uncle, aunt, or a kinsman
who is a potter or blacksmith, coming from the
south and west, or going to the forge of a blacksmith
(Iho-dang nub-nas gnyan zhang-po bu-tsha bu-
sring rdza-mkhan mgar dme-po'i skyo-ma'am
mgo-sha stod rtsib-gYon-sha mar-dkar yang-
paternal household member, coming from the north
(gnyan byang-phyogs yugs-ma bud-med nag-mo pha-
khyim de-'dra'i lag-nas zas-zos)
chang bsing zos)
lag 'khur-ba gra-sha mkhar-las rgan-mo bsten)
gYas zan-sbris 'chang zos)
na mgar-ba'i gsol-mal phyin)
the following demons are inspected
spirit lords of the soil, dge-nsnyen spirits and
malevolent forces, oath-breakers, and evil spirits of
malign goblins, oath-breakers and serpentine
spirits who frequent wood and come from the east
haunting spirits, dropsy-causing spirits and
attachment spirits of the rocks who haunt
afflictions caused by malevolent forces or king
spirits (bdud-dam rgyal-po gnod)
(gdon brtag-pa)
bewitchers who frequent yellowish locations or
misfortune, who frequent brooms, ropes and widows'
(the'u-brang dam-sri klu-rnams shing-phyir
red-coloured horses (btsan-dmu brag-bsen
bzangs-rta dmar chags phyir-'brangs)
property, in the north (bdud-dam dam-sri byur-'dre
byang-gi phyar sle-sbra yugs-sa'i nor-zas phyir-
'brang-phyogs shar-nas)
hosts, including tawny-coloured animals, and come
from the south-west or east (sa-bdag dge-bsnyen
'gong Iho-nub shar-phyogs-nas dud-'gro ser-sogs
ser-chags phyir 'brangs)
'brangs)
the following diets are inspected
rice dishes, cooked vegetables, or mushrooms
warm cooked dishes, hot barley dough, flesh
roasted barley, garlic water, bread, and thick or
unclean flesh from the lower part of the body, or the
(zas brtag-pa)
placed in a wooden bowl, or else pieces of liver
dairy products, cottage cheese, or curd eaten
from a metal plate (dkar-gsum phrum-ma-dang
lcags-sder mkhar-bar dar-zhozos)
from the upper part of the body and small intestine,
or else hot sour wine drunk from a copper bowl or
flesh of a female animal, or kidneys eaten from a
or flesh from a right-sided rib (zas-'bras-sam
black container, and weak cold wine (dhad-can smad-
thin roasted joints of meat eaten from a yellow
b rass container, or from a clay container (zan-sbrus
spag sgog-chu 'khur-ba gzug-sha bsregs-sha
skam sha-ska snod-rag ser-po rdza-snod zos)
gYos-ma sngo-tshod sha-mong shing-snod
bcug-pa zos-rtsib gYas-sha mchin-pa lhu-zos)
red-coloured container (zas-dron spag-pa tsha
stod-sha rgyu-ma snod zangs sder-sogs dmar-
snod chang tsha skyur-po btungs)
sha mo-sha mkhal-ma nag-snod zos chang
bsing drod-med btungs)
the following hairstyles are inspected
short hair
shaven head
bald head [?]
curled hair
matted hair plaits
(ral-can)
(skra brtag-pa)
(skra-phrug)
(ban-de)
(mgo-reg)
(gsil-ma)
goitre
swollen glands or moles
decrepit posture
moles of the armpit
cleft palate
and the following physical characteristics
are inspected (sha-tshan brtag-pa)
(va-ba-can dru-gu)
(smen-pa'am sme)
(dgur-po)
(mchan-khung sme-ba)
(sho-re-ba)
Plate 10, fig. 5
དུས་ཚོད་སྲོལས
དབང་ཀླུང་
གཙ༦
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་བརྟག་
པ།
，
མིང་
，
་་་་་་་་
རག་
ན་
བ་ལ མ་
ཀྱིས་
པ་ན་
མ་ལ
་ ་
༡
་
་ ་ ་
་
ལོ 1:|:
་
ན་
ཡི་
ནོད་བརྟག་པ་མི་ པ་རྒྱས་ཕོ་མཆིན་མིག་
ཚིབ་གཡས་ན།
སྙིང་དང་རྒྱུ་མ་ཁྲག་འཁྲུགས་ལྕེ་རོ་སྟོད་སེང་
མང་ཚོབཟམས་ནང་།
ཕོ་མར་འཐབ་ཤ་ནད་ཚབ་ཕེལ་འགསན་
ཞགགས་ཉནད་ཆམ་པ་ལག་གན་ཐུག་ཟེརན།
གློ་ནད་སྐྲུན་རུབ་ནད་རྣ་བས་ནང་གློ་ཚད་ན།
ཚུནང་རྗེལནང་མཁལ་སྐྱེད་གྲང་བ་པས་མོ་ནང་ཆུ་སོ་
རྣ་པན།
༢
:
1:|:
་
ལྷོ་འམ་བྱང་ནས་གཉེན་སྲིང་མོ་ཡུགས་མོ་ཚེ།
ཡིག་བུ་ལག་ནས་གཉའ་བ་དལ་ཤ་ཆང་བསད་ཟོས
གཉོན་བྱང་ཕྱོགས་ཡུགསམ་བུད་མེད་ནག་
མོ་ཕ་ཁྱིམ་དེ་འདྲའི་ལག་ནས་ཟས་ཟོས།
ལན་རྐྱེན་གྱི་མི་
ཤར་རམ་ནུབ་ནས་གཞིན་མགར་
ཟས་བརྟག་པ།
བ་ཞད་པོ་ཤིང་བཟོའི་ལག་ནས་
སོ་ཚོར་རྩིབ་གཡས་ཟན་སྒྲིས་
འཆད་ཟིས།
གདོན་བརྟག་པ། ཐེའུ་བྲང་དམ་སྲི་ཀླུ་རྣམས་ཤིང་
ཕྱིར་འབྲང་ཕྱོགས་ཤར་ནས། །
ལྷོ་དང་ནུབ་ནས་གཉེན་ཞུང་པོ་བུ་ཚ་བུ་སྲིང་རྫ་་
མཁན་མགར་དམེ་པོའི་སྐྱེ་མའམ་མགོདོག་སོད་
རྩིབ་གཡོནེཤམར་དཀརཡང་ན་མགར་བའི་གསོལ
མལ་ཕྱིན་
།
ཤརར་ལྷོ་ནུབ་ཀྱི་གཉེན་རྒན་མོ་བུཚ་བནཱ་མགྲོན་ལག
འཁུར་ཁ་ག་ཤ་མཁར་ལས་རྒན་མོ་བསྟན།
ས་བདག་དགེ་བསྙེན་དམ་འགོར་ལྷོ་ནུབ་ཤར་ཕྱོགས་
ནས་དུད་འགྲོ་སེར་སེགས་སེར་ཆགས་ཕྱིར་འབར།
་
བཙན་དམུ་བྲག་བསེན་བཟངས་རྟ་དམར་
ཆགས་ཕྱིར་འབྲངས་
བདུད་དམ་རྒྱལ་པོ་གནོད།
།
འདུང་ངམ་དམ་སུ་བྱུར་འདྲི་བྱང་གི་ཕྱིར་སྐྱེ་སྔ་
ཡུགས་སའི་ནོར་ཟས་ཕྱིར་འབྲངས། །
ན
།
ཤརྒྱམ་སྙད་འདས།
ཟན་སྦྱས་སྨུག་སྒོག་ཆུ་འཁུར་བ་གཟུགཤ་བསྲེགས
ད་ཆ་རེ་ཚསྐྱལཔོ་བཏུངས་ཤ་སྐམ་ཤ་སྣ་སྣོད་རག་སེར་པོ་རྫ་སྣོད་ཟེས།
གརགསས་སྦྲུམ་མ་དང་ལྕོགས་
དར་ཞི་བྲེས།
ཟས་བརྟག་པ།ཟས་སྐྱསསམ་གཡོས་མ་ས་
ཚོཤ་ཚེཤིང་སོད་བཅུག་པ་
ཤེས་རྩིབ་གཡས་ཤ་མཆིམ་བལ་མ1
སྣ་བརྟག་པ།
ལྷད་ཅན་སྨད་ཤམོ་ཤ་མཁལ་མ་ནག་
སྣོད་ཟེས་ཆར་བསང་དྲོ་མེད་བཞུངས་
ཉིns
!
རཝཅན་
བན་ད
མགོ་རེག།
སྐ་ཕུག་
གསལ་མ་
ཤ་ཆེན་བརྟག་ས།
མཆན་ཁུང་སེ་བ།
h
ལྦེ་བ་ཅན་དྲུག་
སྨིན་པ་འམ་སྙེད་



287
The impact of the hour of divination
Plate 21, fig. 5
topfosterwijl
མ་སུg
piloutcr rolin
ärreggio abanino
སུཔ་དབང་དང་སྐྱས་དང་ཁྱད་
oneདང་
dar cantasier.
yuzga cezali os
carolaita ja
རང་མགྲཞེས། དགག་
296
Plate 21, fig. 5 (Ms II: ff. 25–29): Divinations concerning wine (White Beryl, f. 438a)
Divinations concerning wine (chang-rtsis)
Divination determining whetherDivination Divination
wine will be present or not determining determining
(chang yod-med)
whether grain whether
Divination
Divination
Divination determining whether wine will be offered or not, and whether it will be
Divination determining the taste of wine (chang-gi ro bstan-pa)
determining
determining
harmful or not (chang ster mi-ster-dang god yong-mi-yong)
whether wine
whether wine
will have
strained wine
is not fully
is half
fermented
will have been
drunk (bsings-
"thungs-tshar-
(mnan-langs
strained
(bsings-pa
ma tshar)
strained
(phyed-bsings)
yod)
yod)
If the hour
If the elements
If the subject's
body and destiny
If the subject's
body and destiny
If the hour
of divination
If the body and
destiny elements
If the body and
destiny elements
If the hour when
the wine is tasted
If the hour when
the wine is tasted
If the hour when
the wine is tasted
If the hour when
the wine is tasted
If the hour when
the wine is tasted
of divination
of the hour and
if the body and
destiny elements
of the subject
inhibit or enhance
If the elements
of the hour and
the subject
form identity-
elements coincide
elements coincide
coincides with a
of the hour of
of the hour
the subject form
is that of the
is that of the
is that of the
“If these elements If the hour
coincide with of divination
the sectors of coincides with a
conception, foetus, subject who has a
embryo, and male year-sign
ablution (dbugs- (pho-'phrad)
is that of the
is that of the
coincides with
a subject who has
with sectors of
with sectors of
subject who has
divination inhibit
of divination
enemy- or
wood element
fire element
earth element
iron element
water element
growth (lus-
decline (lus-
a female year-
a male year-sign
those of the
enhance those
those of the hour
mother- or friend-
adversarial
dbang dan
dbang gud
sign (mo-'phrad)
and another who
subject
of the subject
of divination (phar- relationships
relationships
(dgra-gshed)
mngal lus-khrus)
has a female
(tshur-skyed)
skye'am gcod
(rang-ma-grogs)
(lus-dbang
tshur-gcod)
year-sign (gcig-
pho gcig-mo)
there will be wine.
there will not be
the grain will have
strained wine will
the wine will not
the wine will be
wine will not
wine will be
wine will be
the wine will
the wine will have
the wine will
the wine will
the wine will
the wine will
the wine will
wine.
fermented.
have been drunk.
be fully strained.
half strained.
be offered.
offered.
partially offered.
largely have a
a harmful effect.
be unfermented
be sour.
be astringent
be sweet.
be weak and filtered.
beneficial effect.
(rengs-pa).
Houses and other objects may also affect well-being. Though White Beryl treats the subject of geomancy in great detail in Chapter 32, a
summary of which has been included above, Part 11, a very terse description is included here concerning the elemental relationships
formed by buildings of certain colours and shapes (Supplementary Plate 21, fig. 7). Accordingly, houses located in the centre of a site
symbolise an identity-relationship. In the case of a wood identity-relationship, there should be an oblong house with a door facing east or
west. In the case of a fire identity-relationship, there should be a triangular red house with a door facing north. In the case of an earth
identity-relationship, there should be a square yellow house with a door facing west. In the case of an iron identity-relationship, there
should be a semi-circular white house with a door facing south-west; and in the case of a water identity-relationship there should be a
round blue house with a door facing north.
Similarly, houses located to the right of a site symbolise an enemy-relationship, while those located to the rear
symbolise a mother-relationship, those located to the front symbolise a son-relationship, and those located to the left symbolise a
friend-relationship



288
The White Beryl
Plate 21, fig. 7 (Ms II: ff. 27-29): Divination concerning houses (White Beryl, f. 438a/b)
Wood
Fire
Earth
Iron
Water
Mustration of the elements
('byung-ba'i ri-mo)
oblong house with
triangular red house with
square yellow house with
semi-circular white house with
houses in the centre of a site,
round blue house with
a door facing north
a door facing east or west
a door facing north
a door facing west
a door facing south-west
semi-circular white house with
round blue house with
rectangular white house with
rectangular red house with
rectangular yellow house with
a door facing west
a door facing west or south
a door facing south
a door facing east
a door facing south
rectangular white house with
rectangular red house with
round white house with
round blue house with a door
facing north or south-west
square yellow house with
a door facing south
a door facing east or west
a door facing south
a door facing south
symbolising an identity-
relationship (dbus-rang-gi
mtshan-ma)
houses to the right of a site,
symbolising an enemy-
relationship (gYas dgra'i
mtshan-ma)
houses to the rear of a site,
symbolising a mother-
relationship (rgyab ma'i
mtshan-ma)
houses to the front of a site,
symbolising a son-relationship
(mdun bu'i mtshan-ma)
houses to the left of a site,
symbolising a friend-
relationship (gYon grogs-kyi
mtshan-ma)
red square house with a door
semi-circular white house with
round white house with
square yellow house with
a door facing south
rectangular white house with
a door facing south
facing south or north
a door facing south
a door facing north
rectangular yellow house with
semi-circular white house with
round blue house with
rectangular white house with
square red house with
a door facing east or west
a door facing south
a door facing north
a door facing south
a door facing east
Plate 21, fig. 7
cursusse
re
ཕྱུང་བའི་རི་མོ་
-
1
111
TU
11
IN
uka carilogian
1-
1
JABALU
I
IV
111
IPA
awurgitostígrad
1
.
ECO VON
MUJIU
goranrasgress
S
.
IL
HE
11
il
ognirarca great
gogiardiga
mm



289
The impact of the hour of divination
འ་མ་གཉིས་
39
ཙག་དདཙག་ཁ་
པྲ་ཐོད་་གྲལ་དཀར་ ཕྲགཅད་རྒྱལ་ནག་
ཕྱགདད་ལནང་
།
yadojing ruigi
Plate 22, fig. 2
Divinations may also be conducted to determine whether an invalid will recover or die, based upon the time of the divination, as depicted
on Supplementary Plate 22, fig. 2. For example, recovery is predicted if the vitality element of the subject forms a relationship of growth
with the time of divination, or if the relevant pebbles of conclusive analyses are white. Conversely, death is predicted if the subject's vital-
ity element forms a relationship of decline with the time of divination, or when the relevant pebbles of conclusive analyses are black. In
addition, an average reading portending chronic ill-health with low prospects for recovery is indicated when the vitality element of the
invalid coincides with the sector of conception, or when the relevant pebbles of conclusive analysis are mottled.
Plate 22, fig. 2 (Ms II: ff. 30-32): Divination concerning whether an invalid will die or not (White Beryl, f. 438b)
Divination concerning whether an invalid will die or not ('chi mi-'chi'i rtsis)
When the vitality element
when the vitality element
when the vitality element
when the pebbles of
when the pebbles of
when the vitality element
when the pebbles of conclusive
coincides with the following coincides with a sector of
coincides with a sector of
conclusive analysis
conclusive analysis
coincides with the sector of
analysis concerning the vitality
growth (srog-dan)
decline (srog-gud)
concerning the vitality
conception (srog dbugs-len)
element are mottled (srog-
sectors of growth and
decline (dar-gud ming)
concerning the vitality
element are white (srog
element are black (Srog-
gcod 'gral-khra)
gcod 'gral-dkar)
gcod 'gral-nag)
the invalid will live
the invalid will die
the invalid will live
the invalid will die
it may be hard for the invalid
it may be hard for the invalid to
the invalid will live or die as
follows ('tsho-'chi nad-pa)
to recover and there will be
recover and there will be
chronic ill-health
chronic ill-health
The material objects used by invalids may also be analysed in terms of their elemental relationship with the subject's vitality element
since the clothes of the invalid form a mother-relationship, the pillow forms a son-relationship, the mattress an enemy-relationship, and
the food a friend-relationship. For example (Supplementary Plate 22, fig. 3), an invalid with a wood vitality element should wear blue
clothes, use a red pillow and white mattress, and partake of yellow food such as bread.
The particular diet of invalids should then be inspected (Plate 10, fig. 5). When wood is the governing element,
one should look out for a subject who has a diet of rice dishes, cooked vegetables, or mushrooms placed in a wooden bowl, or else pieces of
liver or flesh from a right-sided rib. When it is fire, one should look out for a subject who has a diet of warm cooked dishes, hot barley
dough, flesh from the upper part of the body and small intestine, or else has been drinking hot sour wine from a copper bowl or red-
coloured container. When it is earth, one should look out for a subject who has a diet of barley-dough, garlic water, bread and thick or
thin roasted joints of meat from a yellow brass container, or from a clay container. When it is iron one should look out for a subject whose
diet has consisted of dairy products or curd served on a metallic plate. Then, when it is water, one should look out for an invalid whose
diet has consisted of eating unclean flesh from the lower part of the body, or the flesh of a female animal, or kidneys, from a black con-
tainer, and drinking weak cold wine. When examining whether these diets apply or not, one should compare the destiny element govern-
ing the hour of divination with that of the subject's year-sign, and if growth is indicated, the invalid should resort to that diet. If decline is
indicated, however, these foods should be avoided.
In addition there is the inspection of the invalid's hairstyle, according to which one should look out for itching
hair, matted dreadlocks, shaven heads, bald heads and short-cut hair when the governing elements are respectively wood, fire, earth, iron
and water. Similarly, there is the inspection of physical characteristics, according to which one should look out for goitres, swollen
glands, decrepit posture, moles of the armpit, and cleft palate when the governing elements are respectively wood, fire, earth, iron and
water. These are all depicted on Plate 10, fig. 5 (see p. 286).



290
The White Beryl
agrcat
93
Plate 22, fig. 3
Also, as shown on Supplementary Plate 22, fig. 4, success or failure in business may be determined generally by examining obstacle
years, and in particular by determining whether the destiny and luck elements of the subject coincide with a sector of growth or decline.
Plate 22, fig. 3 (Ms II: ff. 33–35): Divinations concerning clothing and other materials used by an invalid (White Beryl, f. 438b)
Divinations concerning clothing and other materials used by an invalid (nad-pas brtan-pas gos sogs)
When the invalid's element is as follows ('byung-ba)
wood fire earth
the following clothing, forming a mother-relationship, should be worn (gos) blue green red
the following pillow, forming a son-relationship, should be used (sngas) red yellow white
the following mattress, forming an enemy-relationship, should be used (stan) white blue green
the following food, forming a friend-relationship, should be eaten (zas) yellow white blue
iron
yellow
white
red
green
water
white
green
white
red
ཀྱིས་
Plate 22, fig. 4 (Ms II: 9.30): Divination concerning business (White Beryl, ff. 4386–439a)
Divination concerning business (tshong-rtsis)
If the destiny and luck elements of the subject If the destiny and luck elements of the subject
are in a sector of growth (dbang-klung dar) are in a sector of decline (dbang-klung gud)
one will triumph in business
one will fail in business
jagtig
and reputation
and reputation
Plate 22, fig. 4



291
The impact of the hour of divination
Furthermore, when divinatory barley (mo-nas) is employed, the amount of barley in the container indicates whether the encounter
between the vitality and destiny elements of the hour of divination coincides with a sector of growth, decline or neutrality
(Supplementary Plate 22, fig. 6). For example, when the container is full or half-full it indicates growth, when it is half-full it indicates a
neutral or average reading, and when it is less than half-full or empty this suggests decline. The container should be brought to the place
of divination from a direction in an identity-or enemy-relationship with the element governing the hour of the divination, and its colour
should form an identity-relationship with that same hour (Supplementary Plate 22, fig. 7). For example, at the hour of wood, the con-
tainer should be brought from the east or west, and it should be green in colour.
Plate 22, fig. 6 (Ms II: ff. 30-32): Examination of divinatory barley (White Beryl, f. 439a)
Examination of divinatory barley (mo-nas brtag-pa)
Types of container of divinatory
Types of container of divinatory
གྲད་
नादार
Types of container of divinatory
barley indicating growth and
decline (dar-gud ming)
barley indicating growth in
respect of the vitality element
barley indicating a mottled
divination pebble in respect of
the vitality element (srog-rdel
(srog-dai)
khra-bo)
less than half-full (decline)
full or half-full
half-full or empty
or full (growth)
at the hour of earth
at the hour of iron
at the hour of water
Plate 22, fig. 7 (Ms II: ff. 32–35): Examination of divinatory barley (White Beryl, f. 439a)
Examination of divinatory barley (mo-nas brtag-pa)
The following types of at the hour of wood
at the hour of fire
element governing the
hour of divination
('byung-rigs)
portend that divinatory it should be brought from the it should be brought from the
barley should be brought east or west (shar-ram nub south or north (Iho'am byang-
from the following
nas khyer-yod)
nas khyer-yod)
directions (mo-nas khyer-
phyogs)
and the colour of the
green
it should be brought from the
it should be brought from the
it should be brought from the
intermediate directions or the
west or south (nub-bam Iho-
Plate 22, fig. 6
east (mtshams-sam shar-
nas khyer-yod)
north or intermediate directions
(byang-ngam mtshams-nas
khyer-yod)
nas khyer-yod)
red
yellow
white
blue
container should be as
follows (snod kha-dog)
Plate 22, fig. 7
མཁས་བརྟག་ས་
OU
જલજા
ཤར་རམ(ཞུས་ནས་ཁྱེར་ཡོ།
garottargxiaru stavboucours grave
མ@ས་པིན་ཞི་
ཁྱེར་ཡོང་



292
The White Beryl
འདུག་ཅ་ཀྱི་ལྟས་དན་འགྲུསཡའ་
ས
s་
e
Plate 22, fig. 5



Above Detail of Plate 22, fig, 5, showing the predicted results arising
from certain postures
Finally, certain modes of conduct or physical posture concurrent with the hour of divination also have their respective predicted out-
comes, successful or otherwise (Supplementary Plate 22, fig. 5). For example, a cross-legged posture is said to portend that one will
become a great, awesome and venerable monk (che-gnyan-btsun gsum), while turning one's back to someone portends that one will become
a governor (dpon-po) or politician. Falling down portends that one will become an invalid, while pulling down trees portends that corpses
will be present in a sector of decline, and the corpse of an infant will emerge within the house. Climbing trees portends that there will be
no internal ulcers. A bride plucking wool portends competence, while the building of small walls portends that there will be unfinished
agricultural and building projects. Lying face-downwards portends that one will be mentally unwell, drawing arithmetic calculations in
sand portends that disputations will arise, hyperactivity portends that one will become an artist, and the slow movements of an educated
scholar portend that one will be endowed with awareness.
Plate 22, fig. 5 (Ms II: ff. 31–35): Divinations concerning successful and unsuccessful predicted results based on the subject's posture (White Beryl, f. 439a)
Divinations concerning successful and unsuccessful predicted results based on the subject's posture ('dug-lugs-kyi 'bras-don 'grub mi-'grub)
If one adopts the a cross-legged posture turning one's back falling down
pulling down trees climbing trees
a bride spinning wool
following posture
to someone
building small walls
lying face-downwards
drawing arithmetic
hyperactivity
the slow movements of an
calculations in sand
educated scholar
or conduct ('dug-lugs)
the following
one will become a
one will become a
one will become an
there will be no
competence
there will be
one will be mentally
disputations will arise
one will become
one will be endowed with
corpses will coincide
with a sector of decline,
results are
great, awesome and
governor (dpon-po)
invalid
internal ulcers
unfinished
unwell
an artist
awareness
portended ('bras-bu)
venerable monk (che-
or politician
and the corpse of an
(khong-bras med)
agricultural and
gnyan-btsun gsum)
infant will emerge
building projects
within the house



VIII
Divinations of ill-health



ს
აგან გამორიცხება წყარო)
ოჯა ნაწლავის არ ესიამოვნებას და მას და



296
The White Beryl
The divinatory aspects entailed in the diagnosis of ill-health, including pulse and urinalysis, are treated extensively by Sangs-rgyas
rGya-mtsho in his Blue Beryl, Part Four. Here, in the context of elemental divination, a few additional methods are described, and these
are illustrated on Plate 10.
The deployment of the nineteen divinatory
pebbles (White Beryl, ff. 295b-299a)
The divination techniques for diagnosing the 404 diseases caused by elemental spirits and past conditions should be undertaken early in
the morning by a wise and abstemious person at an auspicious time and in a clean environment. A white mat should be consecrated and
prayers recited to the Three Precious Jewels – the Buddha, his doctrine and the monastic community - along with a solemn declaration of
truth directed at the spirit lords of the years, months, days, hours, trigrams, numeric squares, planets and constellations. Otherwise the
deities presiding over the hour will disrupt the diviner's mind, causing the divination to be misinterpreted.
Then, with unwavering body, speech and mind, the divination should be made, in accordance with one of the
fifteen starting points or topics described in the following paragraph. Mother- and friend-relationships should be indicated by white peb-
bles, enemy-relationships by black pebbles, son-relationships by one of each, identity-relationships of water and earth by white pebbles,
and those of iron, wood or fire by black pebbles.
According to the Clarifying Lamp (gSal-sgron), there are nineteen pebbles cast in the case of the most vital or life-
threatening of all diseases. These comprise sixteen pebbles indicative of the growth- and decline-relationships formed between the sub-
ject’s vitality and body elements and the present year, month, day and hour; along with one each for the calendar date, the weekday and
the constellation. Exemplary chart 8.1 utilises the example of a subject born in the fire dragon year whose state of health is divined for the
earth tiger year.
8.1 Exemplary chart
Subject (brtsi-bya):
Present year (gnam-lo):
Present hour (dus-tshod):
Present month (zla-ba):
3rd wood horse
Present day (zhag-po):
15th wood dragon
fire dragon
earth tiger
earth bird
vitality element = earth
wood
fire
earth
iron
ОХ
growth and decline sectors
ill-health
embryo
ОХ
tomb
XX
ablution
00
of vitality element
body element = earth
earth
O
iron
OX
fire
00
earth
0
ill-health
embryo
ОХ
tomb
XX
ablution
00
growth and decline sectors
of body element
weekday (gza'): Monday
constellation (skar-ma): Svāti
goddess of the calendar day (tshe'i lha-mo): 'Od-Ijang-ma
The interpretations are found in White Beryl, ff. 295b=299a. For example, if the pebble indicative of the vitality element of the year is
white, the subject's vitality element will be in a friend-relationship, for which reason long life will be ensured and there will be no need to
worry since one will be protected by the life-long companion gods ('go-lha) and protector deities (srung-ma). If the reading for growth and
decline is also positive, there is no risk of fatality and one will be impervious to the ingress of primordial bewitchers (ye-'brog).
Conversely, if the pebble indicative of the vitality of the year is black, the pine-tree of life will be severed and rituals will have to be per-
formed to ransom the life-spirit from death. Different supplementary rites, diet and modes of dress are then prescribed to counteract
demons responsible for ailments coinciding with diverse trigrams, as well as to counteract the sectors of decline in relation to vitality,
body, destiny and luck.
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī conveniently summarises these nineteen divinatory pebbles as follows (Moonbeams, ff. 31b-32a):
For the sake of those afflicted by demonic possession,
Similarly, there are eight pebbles representing the (subject's] body element:
Four representing the distinct contrasts between the subject's body element
Generated by agitation of the elements and disruptive thought,
Or on behalf of the children who have just been born,
And the body element of the present year, month, day and hour;
Nineteen pebbles should be deployed.
And four representing the year and so forth,
These comprise: one pebble representing the contrast
Between the subject's vitality and the vitality of the present year;
with which the growth and decline aspects of the [subject's] body element coincides.
Altogether, there are sixteen pebbles representing the vitality and body elements.
One pebble representing the year coinciding with
The growth and decline aspects of the vitality element,
And similarly one pebble each representing the contrast
In addition, three further pebbles [are deployed]:
Respectively representing the positive and negative aspects
Of the subject's vitality element with the vitality element of the present month, day and hour;
of the calendar days of the month, the planets and the constellations.
And one each representing the month and so forth coinciding with
Now, every month the eight goddesses (Iha-mo brgyad) arise on successive (days],
Starting from first day of the month.
The growth and decline aspects of the vitality element.
These comprise: 'Od-'bar, brTan-ma, rNo-dbal-ma,
Thus, there are [altogether] eight pebbles representing the vitality element
with its relationships of contrast, growth and decline.
mDangs-Idan, Char-'bebs, gyo-med, 'Od-Ijang and skyed-byed.
Thus, the first six [of these goddesses] each arise on four distinct days,
And the last two on three distinct days. 3
In all, nineteen pebbles are therefore deployed.
As for the result of such divinations,
One should refer to the Twenty-Verse (Auto) Commentary on the Root Tantra
(rTsa-'grel nyi-shu-pa), and so forth.



297
Divinations of ill-health
The 'pine-tree divination technique' (White Beryl, ff. 274–277b)
The calculation of ill-health has fifteen distinct starting points (rtsis-'go rnam-pa bco-lnga) corresponding to fifteen diverse topics of
inquiry, all of which are enumerated on Plate 10, fig. 2 (see p. 298).
The first topic examines the degree to which the life-spirit or lifespan has been dissipated (bla-tshe stor ma-stor).
Here the calculation differentiates the strength of the subject's vitality, body, destiny and luck elements, counting forwards from the
present year a number of years equivalent to the subject's age. It is utilised for inspecting the subject's own lifespan. If the subject is a
child, the reading may be made on the basis of the father's life-principle; if the subject is a woman, it may be made on the basis of her hus-
band's, or if it is a male, on the basis of that of the subject's elder or younger brother. If the reading suggests that the life-spirit is void,
various longevity rites should be undertaken.
The second topic examines the degree to which kings have slipped from their thrones (rgyal-po'i gdan-sa-nas 'dred
mi-'dred). Here, the calculation is made starting from the tiger year in an enemy-relationship with the subject's own element, once again
counting the number of years equivalent to the subject's age. For example, in the case of a subject of the wood constitutional type, the
count will begin from the iron tiger year. This divination is utilised for inspecting the king's residence. If the reading is void, the subject's
paternal relatives will be oppressed and bloody wounds will be inflicted, for which reason prescribed rites should be undertaken.
The third topic examines the degree to which the subjects felt hat has been covered by dust (zhva-phyingrdul-'og
thud-dam ma-tshud). Here, for example, in the case of a subject of the wood constitutional type, one counts downwards from the water or
fire tiger year, until reaching the subject's present age. The reading will refer to the state of the paternal ancestors. If the felt hat is cov-
ered by dust, the subject's luck and appetite will have diminished, so that rites of aversion must be performed.
The fourth topic examines the degree to which ministers have risen from the ranks (blon-po gral-sa-nas yar-ram
ma-yar). Here, one counts forward, starting from the tiger year conforming to that of the subject's destiny element, until reaching the
subject's present age. For example, in the case of a subject of the wood constitutional type, the count will begin from the wood tiger year.
If bad advice has been imparted by ministers, specific rites of aversion should be undertaken.
The fifth topic examines the degree to which lynx- and wolf-skin pelts retain their sheen (gYi-spyang gra-chag-
gam mi-chag). Here, one counts forward, starting from the tiger year in a friend-relationship with the subject's element, until reaching the
subject's present age. For example, in the case of a subject of the wood constitutional type, the count will begin from the earth tiger year.
The reading for a woman may be made on the basis of the husband's chart and vice versa. If the pelts do not retain their sheen, the lifespan
will be in decline, and five demons will be encountered. Appropriate counteracting rites should be performed.
The sixth topic examines the degree to which one is sought or exploited by malevolent forces (bdud-kyis tshol mi-
tshol). Here, one counts backwards, starting from the hare year in an enemy-relationship with the subject's element, until reaching the
subject's present age. For example, in the case of a subject of the wood constitutional type, the count will begin from the iron hare year. If
the cutting influence of demons is present, counteracting rites must be undertaken.
The seventh topic examines the degree to which one is led astray by ogres (srin-pos khrid ma-khrid). Here, one
counts forwards, starting from the hare year in a friend-relationship with the subject's element, until reaching the subject's present age.
For example, in the case of a subject of the wood constitutional type, the count will begin from the earth hare year. If the subject has been
led astray, there will be harmful influences and inimical encounters, all of which require counteracting rituals to be performed.
The eighth topic examines the degree to which the wish-granting tree has been severed (dpag-bsam-shing chag
ma-chag). Here, one counts forwards, starting from the hare year in an identity-relationship with the subject's element, until reaching the
subject's present age. For example, in the case of a subject of the wood constitutional type, the count will begin from the wood hare year.
This technique is utilised for inspecting the vitality of children. If the tree has been severed, there will be retribution due to serpentine
spirits and weapons, while sudden diseases will emerge. Therefore rites pertaining to the serpentine spirits should be carried out.
The ninth topic examines the degree to which the treasury has been emptied (bang-mdzod stongs ma-stongs). Here,
one counts forwards, starting from the hare year in a mother-or son-relationship with the subject's element, until reaching the subject's
present age. For example, in the case of a subject of the wood constitutional type, the count will begin from the fire hare year. If the treas-
ury has been emptied, ingressing demons should be exorcised and the loss of luck or wealth replenished, while various other rites are to
be performed
The tenth topic examines the degree to which the ‘heavenly lifeline' has been cut (yas-kyi 'ju-thag chad ma-chad).
Here, one counts forwards, starting from the thirteenth year before the present one, until reaching the subject's present age. This method
is utilised for inspecting the vitality of invalids. If the lifeline has been cut, there will be afflictions due to the heavenly demons (yas-kyi
bdud) and the atmospheric demons (steng-gdon)," and these must be counteracted by appropriate ritual activities.
The eleventh topic examines the degree to which the suspended lifeline' has been cut (dpyang-thag chad ma-chad).
Here, one counts backwards, starting from the thirteenth year after the present one, until reaching the subject's present age. This method
is utilised for inspecting the vitality of the heavenly cord. Ifit has been cut or released, there will be afflictions due to the celestial planets and
stars, the spirit lords of the soil will be aggravated, and various ailments will ensue, for which reason preventative rites must be undertaken.
The twelfth topic examines the degree to which hurricanes will arise (rlung-'tshub langs ma-langs). Here, one
counts forwards, starting from the tiger year in a son-relationship with the subject's element, until reaching the subject's present age.
For example, in the case of a subject of the wood constitutional type, the count will begin from the fire tiger year. A husband's situation
should be examined in the sector of the wife. If the prediction is that hurricanes will arise, there will be slander and imprecations to be
reversed by ritual means.
The thirteenth topic examines the degree to which the gatehouse has been damaged (sgo-khyim zhig ma-zhig).
Here, one counts backwards, starting from the monkey year in a mother-relationship with the subject's element, until reaching the sub-
ject's present age. For example, in the case of a subject of the wood constitutional type, the count will begin from the water monkey year.
This method is utilised for inspecting the condition of married couples. If it has been damaged due to demonic afflictions, sorrows will
descend upon the master of the house and the thirteen 'lower demons' (ma-bdud bcu-gsum)? will cause harm, prompting the need for
appropriate ritual remedies.



298
The White Beryl
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
Examines the
Examines the
Plate 10, fig. 2 (Ms I: ff. 42–47): The 'pine-tree divination technique' (White Beryl, ff. 274–277b)
Topic number 1
6
7
(grangs bstan-pa)
Description of the Examines the Examines the Examines the Examines the Examines the Examines the Examines the
divinatory pebble degree to which degree to which degree to which degree to which degree to which degree to which degree to which
(rde'u ming the subject's life kings have the subject's felt ministers have lynx- and one is exploited one is led
bstan-pa) -principle or life- slipped from hat has been risen from the wolf-skin pelts by malevolent astray by ogres
span has been their thrones covered by dust ranks (blon-po retain their sheen forces (bdud-kyis (srin-pos khrid
dissipated (bla- (rgyal-po'i gdan- (zhva-phying gral-sa-nas (gYi-spyang 'jag-rkun langs ma-khrid)
tshe gtor mi-gton) sa stongs thal-ba'i 'og-tu yar-ram ma-yar) gra-chag-gam ma-langs)
mi-stongs) song ma-song)
mi-chag)
Examines the Examines the Examines the Examines the
degree to which degree to which degree to which degree to which
the wish-granting the treasury has the heavenly cord the lifeline has
tree has been been emptied of has been cut been cut
severed (dpag- gold or silver (yas-kyi 'ju-thag (dpyang-thag
bsam-shing chag (gser-dngul bang chad ma-chad) grol ma-gro)
Examines the Examines the
degree to which degree to which
the pillow of an the earthly peg
invalid has been has been
damaged dislodged
(nad-pa'i sngas- (rten-phur don
degree to which
these fifteen
topics or starting
Examines the Examines the
degree to which degree to which
hurricanes will the gatehouse
arise on the has been
northern plains damaged
(byang-thang-la (skar-ma'i
rlung langs khyim-bu
ma-langs) zhig-ma-zhig)
degree to which
these fifteen
topics or starting
points for casting points for casting
the divination
ma-chag)
-mdzod stongs
shing chag
ma-don)
pebbles have
pebbles have
ma-stongs)
ma-chag)
been impeded,
according to the
been impeded,
according to
Narapa tradition
the IDumpopa
(gzhan-gyi zlos-
pa sdel-sgo
tradition
(gzhan-gyi zlos-
'gags-ma-'gag pa sdel-sgo 'gags
na-ra-pa'i lugs -ma 'gags Idum
-po-pa'i lugs)
Starting points for Counting the Counting the Counting the Counting the Counting the Counting the Counting the Counting the Counting the Counting the Counting the Counting the Counting the Counting the Counting the Starting from the Starting from the
the divinatory subject's present subject's present subject's present subject's present subject's present subject's present subject's present subject's present subject's present subject's present subject's present subject's present subject's present subject's present subject's present contrast between contrast between
calculations age forwards from age forwards age forwards age forwards, age forwards, age backwards, age forwards, age forwards, age forwards, age forwards, age backwards, age forwards, age backwards, age forwards, age backwards, the subject's the numeric
(skor-'go bskongs the present year from the tiger from the fire starting from the starting from the starting from the starting from starting from the starting from starting from the starting from the starting from the starting from the starting from the starting from the vitality, body and squares
bstan-pa) (gnam-lo gang- year in tiger year tiger year tiger year in hare year in the hare year hare year in the hare year thirteenth year thirteenth year tiger year in a monkey year in fifth year before fifth year after destiny elements indicative of the
yi nas mi-des an enemy- (me-stag-nas conforming to the a friend an enemy in a friend an identity in a mother- before the after the present son-relationship a mother- the present year the present year and the numeric subject's vitality,
lo-du lon relationship with lo-du lon thur subject's destiny relationship relationship with relationship with relationship with relationship with present one one (gnam-lo- with the subject's relationship with (gnam-lo nas (gnam-lo-nas squares indicative body and destiny
zur-du bskon) the subject's own -du spub) element (dbang- with the subject's the subject's the subject's the subject's the subject's (gnam-lo yar-gyi nas mar-gyi bcu- element (bu the subject's Inga lo-du lon mar-gyi Inga-nas of the vitality, elements and the
element (dgra-
thang mthun-pa'i element (grogs- element (dgra element (grogs element (brtsi- element (ma yos- bcu-gsum nas nas yar-du lon stag-nas lo-du element (ma thur-la bgrangs) gyen-la bgrangs) body, destiny and numeric squares
stag-nas lo-du lon
stag-nas lo-du stag-nas lo-du yos-nas lo-du lon yos-nas lo-du lon bya-dang gcig- nas lo-du lon mar-gyi du-lon gyen-la bskon lon thur-la spub) spres-nas lo-du
luck elements of indicative of the
thur-du spub)
lon thur-la spug) Ion thur-la spub) gyen-la bgrangs) thur-la spub de- pa'i yos-nas lo-du thur-la spub) thur-la spub)
lon gyen-la
the present year vitality, body,
dang 'thab-bo) Ion thur-la spub)
'grangs)
(brtsi-bya'i srog- destiny and luck
lus dbang-klung- elements of the
gis gnam-lo'i
present year
(brtsi-bya'i srog-
srog-lus
dbang-klung
lus dbang-klung
sme-bar 'thab)
sme-ba-dang
gnam-lo'i
Srog-lus
dbang-klung
sme-ba 'thab)
vitality numeric
Pine-tree of the
vitality element
divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble vitality numeric
of vitality (srog) of vitality (srog) of vitality (srog) of vitality (srog) of vitality (srog) of vitality (srog) of vitality (srog) of vitality (srog of vitality (srog) of vitality (srog) of vitality (srog) of vitality (srog) of vitality (srog of vitality (srog) of vitality (srog) square of
square of
present year
present year
(srog-gi
thang-shing)
(gnam-lo'i srog- (gnam-lo'i srog-
gi sme-ba)
gi sme-ba)
Pine-tree of the
divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble body element
body element
body element
of body (lus)
of body (lus)
of body (lus)
of body (lus)
of body (lus)
of body (lus)
of body (lus)
of body (lus)
of body (lus)
of body (lus)
of body (lus)
of body (lus)
of body (lus)
of body (lus)
of body (lus
numeric square
numeric square
(lus-kyi
of present year
(gnam-lo'i lus-
of present year
(gnam-lo'i lus-
thang-shing)
kyi sme-ba)
kyi sme-ba)
destiny element
Pine-tree of the divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble destiny element
destiny element of destiny of destiny of destiny of destiny of destiny of destiny of destiny of destiny of destiny of destiny of destiny of destiny of destiny of destiny of destiny
numeric square
(dbang-thang-gi (dbang-thang) (dbang-thang) (dbang-thang) (dbang-thang) (dbang-thang) (dbang-thang) (dbang-thang) (dbang-thang (dbang-thang (dbang-thang) (dbang-thang) (dbang-thang (dbang-thang (dbang-thang) (dbang-thang) of present year
numeric square
of present year
thang-shing)
(gnam-lo'i
(gnam-lo'i
Pine-tree of the
dbang-thang- dbang-thang-
gi sme-ba) gi sme-ba)
divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble divinatory pebble
of luck
of luck
of luck
of luck
of luck
of luck
of luck
of luck
of luck
of luck
of luck
of luck
of luck of luck
of luck
of luck
of luck
(klung-rta) (klung-rta) (klung-rta) (klung-rta) (klung-rta) (klung-rta) (klung-rta) (klung-rta) (klung-rta) (klung-rta) (klung-rta) (klung-rta) (klung-rta) (klung-rta) (klung-rta) (klung-rta) (klung-rta)
luck element
(klung-rta'i
thang-shing)



299
Divinations of ill-health
The fourteenth topic examines the degree to which the pillow of an invalid has been damaged (sngas-zhig-gam ma-zhig). Here, one counts
forwards, starting from the fifth year before the present year, until reaching the subject's present age. This method is utilised for inspect-
ing the duration of childhood diseases. If the invalid's pillow has been damaged, there will be demonic afflictions requiring ritual
rectification.
The fifteenth topic examines the degree to which the ‘earthly peg' has been dislodged (rten-phur phyungs ma-
phyungs). Here, one counts backwards corresponding to the subject's age, starting from the fifth year after the present year. This method
is utilised for inspecting the life-grid (ling-tshe). If it has been dislodged, the earthly gate (sa-sgo) will be torn asunder, one should watch
out for enemies, and there will be afflictions due to spirit lords of the soil, serpentine spirits and plague-causing demons. All these must be
reversed by ritual means.
Two further topics examine the degree to which the fifteen previous topics or starting points for casting the div-
ination pebbles have been impeded (rdel-sgo 'gags ma-'gags). Here, one counts backwards corresponding to the subject's age, starting
from the sixth-removed year-sign (drug-'bras) after the present one. This method is utilised for inspecting the duration of diseases. If they
have been impeded, appropriate remedial action should be taken. Some also claim that this last method is applied by calculating the con-
trasts between the numeric squares of the subject's vitality, body, destiny and luck element and those of the present year.
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises the methods employed in the ‘pine-tree' divination technique in the following
verses (Moonbeams, ff. 32a-33a):
Now, the 'pine-tree' ® divination technique concerning ill-health
In the eleventh, concerning the degree to which the suspended lifeline has been cut,
Should first be recognised as the basis of [all such] divinations.
One counts backwards corresponding to the subject's age, starting from the thirteenth year after
the present one.
It comprises the following fifteen computational starting points:9
In the first, concerning the degree to which the [subject's] life-spirit or lifespanhas been dissipated,
In the twelfth, concerning the degree to which hurricanes will arise on the northern plateau, 11
One counts forwards corresponding to the subject's age, starting from the present year.
In the second, concerning the degree to which kings have slipped from their thrones,
One counts forwards corresponding to the subject's age, starting from the iron tiger year. 10
One counts forwards corresponding to the subject's age, starting from the fire tiger year.
In the thirteenth, concerning the degree to which the gatehouse has been damaged, 12
One counts forwards corresponding to the subject's age, starting from the water monkey year.
In the third, concerning the degree to which the subject's felt hat has been covered by dust,
In the fourteenth, concerning the degree to which an [invalid's) pillow has been damaged,
One counts forwards corresponding to the subject's age, starting from the fifth year before the present one
One counts forwards corresponding to the subject's age, starting from the water tiger year.
In the fourth, concerning the degree to which ministers have risen from the ranks,
One counts forwards corresponding to the subject's age, starting from the wood tiger year.
In the fifth, concerning the degree to which lynx- and wolf-skin pelts retain their sheen,
In the fifteenth, concerning the degree to which the earthly peg has been dislodged,
One counts backwards corresponding to the subject's age, starting from the fifth year after the present one.
In the sixteenth, concerning the degree to which these fifteen methods or starting points for casting the
divination pebbles have been impeded,
One counts forwards corresponding to the subject's age, starting from the earth tiger year.
In the sixth, concerning the degree to which one is sought by demons,
One counts [backwards] corresponding to the subject's age, starting from the iron hare year.
One counts backwards corresponding to the subject's age, starting from the sixth-removed year-sign (drug-
'bras) after the present year.
In the seventh, concerning the degree to which one is led astray by ogres,
One counts (forwards] corresponding to the subject's age, starting from the earth hare year.
He adds (Moonbeams, f. 33b):
In the eighth, concerning the degree to which the wish-granting tree has been severed,
Moreover, there is another technique utilised nowadays for deploying the pebbles
One counts (forwards] corresponding to the subject's age, starting from the wood hare year
In the ninth, concerning the degree to which the treasury has been emptied,
Of the last of the (sixteen] computational starting points.
One counts (forwards) corresponding to the subject's age, starting from the fire hare year.
Accordingly, the prospects of the divinatory pebbles (rdel-sgo) are examined
By contrasting the four numeric squares indicative of the subject's vitality element and so forth
In the tenth, concerning the degree to which the heavenly lifeline has been cut,
One counts forwards corresponding to the subject's age, starting from the thirteenth year before
With the numeric squares indicative of the vitality, body, destiny and luck
the present one.
of the present year.
ག
།བ ལ་བས་བསྟན་ལ། །ཅི ག་ པ།ཤིང་
རྣལུའི་མིང་བསྟན་པ། རང་གི་ཆ་ཆ་སྦྱོར་མི་སྦྱོར། རྒྱལ་པོའི་གདན་ལྕེཔཇི་ཕྱི
སྐོམའགོ་བསྐོངས་ གནམ་ལོ་གང་ཡིནས་ དགྲ་སྟགནས་ལོ་དུ་
ཁསན་བ། མི་དེས་ལོ་དུ་ལོན་ཐུརད་ ཐུར་དུ་སྒྲུབ།
། ཅུ ཆུ པ་འུ་ ལྔ ་
་ འབྲེལ་བའི་འོག་ཏུ་སོང་ བློནོ་བྲལམཱཡརིམ་ཡར། གཡི་སྤྱང་གི་གྲྭཆགཾམཚ།
མ ་ཕྱག་ནས་ལོ་དུ བང་ཐཔ་མཐུན་པའི་སྟག་ གྲོགས་སྟག་ནམ་ལོ་
ལེན་ཐུར་དུ་སྤྲུབ། ནས་ལེ་དུ་ལོན་ཐུར་ལསྤྲུག དུ་ལོན་ཐུརལ་སྤྲུབ།
དྲུག་ མདུན་ བ རྒྱད་
བངཀྱི་ངག་རྒྱུན་ལམ་ལང མགྲིན་པོས་ཁྲིདི་མ་བྲང། དཔག་ས་གྱི་ཤིང་གི་མ
དགྲ་ཡིས་ས་ལོ་དུ་ གྲོགས་མེས་ནས་ལོ་ འཕྱིབྱ་ངགཅིག་པའི་ཡོན་
ལོན་རྐྱེན་ལ་བགྲངས། དུལོན་ཐུཔལ་སྒྲུབ་པ་དང་ མོ་དུ་ཁོན་ཤུཔལ་སྤྲུབ།
དགུ་པཅུ་ཡཙཔ་
ར་དངུལ་བམཚོ་ཡོལ་ ཡསྤྱི་ཇུ་ཁྲག་ཆུ་ལ་ཚད། དཔྱངསྦགགྲོལམ་གྲོལ།
མ་ཡེམསལ་དུ་ གརྣ་ལེ་ཡར་གྱི་བཙུན་ གཞི་ལོན་མར་གྱི་རྒྱུ་
ལོན་ཐུར་ལ་སྤབ། མར་གྱི་དུ་ལེན་ཐུང་ལ་སྤྲུབ་ནས་ཡང་དུ་ལེན་གྱེན་ལ་
1 བཤུས་ ། བཅུ་གསུམ་ པ ཅུ་བཞི།
རྒྱ་ཟཔཏྟཱ་དཔལངསི་མ་ལས། མར་མའི་ཁྱོབུ་གོམ་ཞིག། དཔི་ས་ཤིན་མག།
བུ་སྟགནས་ལོ་དུ་ལོན། མ་སྤེལ་ནས་ལོ་དུ་ གཞི་ལོ་
ཐུརལབ། ཁོན་རྐྱེན་ལ་བགྲངས། ལ་དུ་ལོན་ཐུར་ལ་བགྲཔ
ང རྒྱལྔ་བཅུ་དྲ་ བ རཱུ་པདུན།
རྟན་ཕྱིར་རིན་མི་དོན་གྲྭའ བངགགེ་ལྟར|གaཐའ་ཁྲིག། །
གནམ་ལོ་ནས་ བྱ་པའི་མགོ་སབརྩི་བྱའི་སྲོག་ལྔས་
སར་ གྱི་ལྔ་ཞེས་ ཇབརང་གིས་གgདབང་སྤྱོད་སྣ་ཁ་ར
གྱིན་ལ་བགྲངས། མོའི་སྐས་འགན་ལིའི་སློབ
ཤམ་-1]
བྱུང་སྨྲ་བར་འཐོབ།|ཏབང་ལྷུང་སྒོ་བ་༢ཐག་
|གཞམ་ལོའིསྲེག་ གན་ལེ་མིག་སྤྱི་བ་
བྱ།སྲོག་ཐངཤིང་། ༧ སྲོག་ལ
སྲོག་
༧ སག་
༧ སྲེག་
༧ སེག་
༧ སེག་
༧ སྲེག་
༧ སྲོག་
༧ སོག་༧
སག་
༧ སོག་
༧སོག་༤
ག་
༧ སེག་
སུག
་
།ལུས་ཀྱི་ཐང་ཤིང་ ༧ ལུས་
ས་༧ ལུས་༧ ལུས
གནམ་འW1 གནམ་ལR
ཀྱི ་སྤྱི་བ། ལུས་ཀྱི་སྨེ་བ།
[༧ལུས་
ས་༧
ཕྱིར་
༧ལས་
༧ལུས་༧ ལུས་
ལུས་
།དབང་ཐང་གི་ཐང་། དབང་ཐང་
༧བ་ཐང ཀདབང་ཐང ༧བང་ཐད་
“དབང་ཐང་
དབར་ཐུང་
༧དབང་ཐང་ ལབང་ཐང་
ལ དབང་ཐང་ ལདབང་ཐང་ འདབང་ཐང
པདབང་ཐང་
༧དབང་ཐང་
༧དབང་ཐང་ ༧དབངཐཔ་
གནམ་ལོའི་དབང་| གནམ་ལོའི་ངབང་
ཐང་གི་སྐྱེ་བ། ] ཐང་གི་སྨེ་བ།
1
Plate 10, fig. 2



300
The White Beryl
Whichever method is employed, sixteen divination pebbles should be placed, representing the contrast of the subject's vitality, body, des-
tiny and luck elements with the vitality, body, destiny and luck elements suggested by one of these sixteen divinatory bases (rtsis-gzhı).
The prognostication is auspicious if most are white, and very auspicious if they are all white. If the pebbles are both black and white, the
‘pine-tree' is shaken but not cut, and can be revived. If most are black, rituals should be employed, and if all are black, rites corresponding
to the appropriate starting point for the divination should be undertaken. In the words of Lo-chen Dharmaśrī (Moonbeams, f. 33a/b):
Four sets of four pebbles should be deployed,
Each one representing the contrast
Between the subject's vitality, body, destiny and luck aspects
And the vitality, body, destiny and luck aspects
Suggested by whichever of these bases of divination is appropriate.
They should be coloured white or black in accordance with the
[aforementioned] "fixed' divination system.13
Then, after counting the white and black pebbles,
One should determine their distinct auspicious and inauspicious quantities.
Other scholars refer to further methods of ‘pine-tree' divination. These include one where the subject's vitality, body, destiny and luck
elements are contrasted with the corresponding aspects of a given year, month and day. When these divination pebbles are utilised with
reference to time, the health of the subject's father is indicated by the reading for the year, that of the subject's mother by the reading for
the month, that of the subject's child by the reading for the day, and that of the subject's grandchild by the reading for the hour.
In the context of this ‘pine-tree' technique, which may be utilised to assist in the diagnosis ofill-health or for prophy-
lactic purposes, diverse readings may be made for specific categories of ailments (White Beryl, ff. 276b-277b). These comprise wounds and
lung diseases, cold diseases, haemorrhoids, liver and gall bladder ailments, contagious diseases and rheumatism, tumours and skin diseases,
and ailments pertaining to childbirth. Different rituals are prescribed corresponding to these diverse ailments if the reading is negative.
Seven great divination methods (White Beryl, ff. 277b-280b)
It is said that the aforementioned sixteen topics or so-called “divinatory eyes” (rtsis-mig) may also be subsumed in seven great techniques
for the divination of ill-health (rtsis-chen bdun), which are all depicted on Plate 10, fig. 3. These comprise: (1) the divination of the four
pine-trees (thang-shing bzhi); (2) the divination of the fifteen golden bridges (gser-zam bco-lnga), the origin of which is attributed to
mKhas-pa rGya-cang-la'u; (3) the divination of the branches of turquoise juniper (gYu-shug 'dab-rgyas), which is attributed to Zim-shing
byang-chub rgyal; (4) the divination of the fruit of the wish-granting tree (dpag-bsam 'bras-bu), which is attributed to Tsher-zher Ye-shes
dPal; (5) the divination of fortunate and unfortunate households (dpal-byur-khyim), which is attributed to rGya-yi mKhas-pa Tsug-tu;
(6) the divination tally of the dying and living eyes (shi-mig gson-mig grangs), attributed to La'u Pan-rgyal; and (7) the divination of the
degree to which the divination grid is overstepped (ling-tshe brgal-lam ma-brgal), the origin of which is attributed to rGya-pan phu-lu.14
Each of these seven great techniques for the divination of ill-health (rtsis-chen bdun) is applied successively in
three sectors, which are technically known as lnga-khram. The first (Inga-khram dang-po) is the sector concerning male subjects, the sec-
ond (Inga-khram bar-pa) that of female subjects, and the third (Inga-khram tha-ma) that of child subjects. If the pebbles placed in the upper
or first sector are black, it will be inauspicious for males, and the same applies for females and children in their respective sectors.
Divination of the four pine-trees (thang-shing bzhi)
If the pine-tree of the vitality element (srog-gi thang-shing) is secure, it will be auspicious because the pillar of longevity will be secure, and
no primordial bewitchers (ye-'brog) will suddenly cause affliction. If the pine-tree of the body element is secure, the body will flourish and
not be impaired by diseases, while its lustre and energy will be manifest. If the pine-tree of the destiny element is secure, wealth will
increase, and if the pine-tree of the luck element is secure, one's reputation will be enhanced, resembling gold adorned with turquoise.
Conversely, if the pine-tree of the vitality element is broken, the lifespan will diminish, great birds will swoop to
the ground, great lakes will evaporate, and so forth. If the pine-tree of the body element is broken, the lustre of the body will diminish and
one will be subject to prolonged diseases. If the pine-tree of the destiny element is broken, there will be misfortunes and loss of luck; and if
the pine-tree of the luck element is broken, demons will cause affliction and the banner of good reputation will wilt. There will be
enforced migration, bad reputations and disputes. In all such cases, counteractive remedies are prescribed.
Now, if two of the trees are broken, it will be inauspicious in that both the lifespan and good fortune will be in
decline. If three are broken, one should inspect the outermost sector of the grid, and if all four are broken, one will have overstepped the
base-line of the grid.
Each of the four pine-trees is subdivided into the three aforementioned sectors. If the pebbles placed in the upper
or first sector are black, it will be inauspicious for males, and the same applies for females and children in their respective sectors. In the
case of the fourth pine-tree, that of the luck element, the division into three sectors is also said to correspond respectively to the family
tombs (dur-sa), the household (khang-sa) and the land (zhing-sa),15 so if any of these three sectors is broken, it will be inauspicious for the
tombs, the household or the land. Specific rites are prescribed if these indications are inauspicious.
Divination of the fifteen golden bridges (gser-zam bco-Inga)
It is said that a golden bridge is established if the link between the top and bottom of the chart is indicated by white pebbles, and that it
will have collapsed if the link is indicated by black pebbles. If a bridge is established in the upper or first sector, it will be auspicious for
males, there will be long life and freedom from disease. If it is established in the middle sector, the ocean of existence will swell; and if it is
established in the lower or last sector, children will be safe and secure. If a bridge between the male and female sectors is established, it
resembles the preparation of a turquoise throne. If a bridge between the female and child sectors is established, it resembles a lion reach-
ing the snow-line. If one bridge is established, it resembles a cloudy day; if two are established it resembles the sun shining through the
clouds; and if three, four or more are established it will be very auspicious. Invalids will regain their health with ease, and wishes will be



301
Divinations of ill-health
.
accomplished. If two bridges are established between the male and female sectors, there will be an auspicious bond between husband and
wife, and if two bridges are established between the female and child sectors, children will rest secure in their mothers’ laps.
Conversely, if one bridge collapses, there will be anxiety and anguish. If two collapse, the roots of the tree of life
will have decayed, and if three, four or more collapse, the fruits of the tree of life will be rotten. If a bridge collapses in the upper or first
sector, it will be inauspicious for males; if it collapses in the middle sector female demons (mo-bdud) will ingress; and if it collapses in the
last sector, a child's tree of life will wilt. If a bridge between the male and female sectors is broken, hostile forces will ingress. If a bridge
between the female and child sectors is broken, one will fear for one's life at the hands of brigands. If two bridges between the male and
female sectors collapse, there will be divorce, and if two between the female and child sectors collapse a child may be lost. In all such neg-
ative cases, counteractive rites are prescribed.
Divination of the branches of turquoise-coloured juniper (gYu-shug'dab-rgyas)
If the branch of turquoise-coloured juniper extends from left to right, the connection is said to be auspicious (white). In the upper or male
sector, it will resemble the hoisting of flags. In the middle sector, which is that of females, it will resemble a secure svāstika, and in the last or
child sector it will resemble an ocean filled to the brim. If the link between the male and female sectors is well established, the household
will be secure, if that between the female and child sectors is established, it will resemble a glorious sunrise. If one link is established it will
resemble a break in the clouds, if two are established it will resemble an unpolluted sunrise, if three are established it will resemble a golden
grassland filled with sheep, and if four or more are established it will be most auspicious, resembling the opening of a dungeon's window.
Conversely, if the link is broken in the male sector, the divine flags will be burnt to ashes. If it is broken in the
female sector, they will fall to the ground, and if it is broken in the child sector, one will lose one's faculties. If a link between the male and
female sectors is broken, the household will be damaged. If a link between the female and child sectors is broken, the citadel of existence
will collapse. If one is broken, demons will ingress, if two are broken, there will be misfortunes, while the window of darkness will envelop,
and if four or more are broken it will be most inauspicious. In all such negative cases one should apply the prescribed ritual remedies.
Divination of the fruit of the wish-granting tree (dpag-bsam 'bras-bu)
If the ripened fruit of the wish-granting tree hangs down from right to left, the connection is said to be auspicious (white). If this coin-
cides with the male sector, it will resemble a planted banner. In the middle sector it will resemble fine clothes, and in the child sector, it
will resemble the gathering of the drops of progress (thig-pa chags). If a good connection is established between the male and female sec-
tors, it will resemble the chirping of birds, if it is established between the female and child sectors, it will resemble the growth of flowers.
If one such good connection is established, the tree of life will bring forth shoots. If two are established, its branches will extend through
space. If three are established, the leaves will flourish, and if four are established its fruit will ripen.
Conversely, if it is broken in the male sector, the pillars of heaven will collapse (gnam-ka rdib), if it is broken in the
female sector there will be drought, and if it is broken in the child sector, flowers will be destroyed by frost. If it is broken between the
male and female sectors, it will resemble deer being slain, if it is broken between the female and child sectors, it will resemble a turquoise
bead with a damaged eye (gYu-mig bol). If one is broken, the tree will wither from its roots; if two are broken, the ocean of the life-spirit
will evaporate from its depths; if three are broken, beams will break in the middle; and if four are broken, hailstorms will swell the rivers.
In all such negative cases, counteractive rites are prescribed.
Divination of fortunate and unfortunate households (dpal-byur-khyim)
Fortunate households are indicated by four white dots. If good fortune coincides with the first sector, men will pray to the gods. Ifit coin-
cides with the middle sector, beautiful flags will be unfurled, and if it coincides with the last sector, the bow of existence will be drawn.
If it occurs between the male and female sectors, both man and woman will be potent and efficacious. If it occurs
between the female and child sectors, there will be a good family line, the mother and child will never be separated, and the pillar of exis-
tence will be secured. If one fortunate household is established, it will resemble the opening of a skylight window. If two are established,
it will resemble a cloudless sunrise. If three are established, it will resemble snow melting in the upper reaches of a valley, and if four or
more are established, it will resemble the ripening of the crops.
Conversely, unfortunate households are indicated by four black dots. If black demons ingress into the male sec-
tor, it will resemble someone being pursued by a paternal uncle. If they ingress into the female sector, it will resemble a deer being pur-
sued by a dog, and if they ingress into the child sector, it will resemble someone falling into the clutches of demons. If misfortune occurs
between the male and female sectors, the bow of existence will be broken, and if it occurs between the female and child sectors, demons
will fire arrows. If one such unfortunate connection is established, the heart will be engulfed by darkness. If two are established, the lord
of death will be destabilised. If three are established, one's child will be sold to demons, and if four or more are established, the advantage
will be that no ritual ransom need be undertaken (phan bslu-ba'i yas mi-'dod). In the case of negative indications, one should follow the pre-
scribed ritual antidotes.
Divination tally of the dying and living eyes (shi-mig gson-mig grangs)
In this case, when there are four white dots with a central black dot, the black one ‘dies' or is absorbed, and if there are four black dots with
a central white one, the white one ‘dies' or is absorbed. If the ‘death' of the black dot occurs in the first sector, hostile demons will be exor-
cised; ifit occurs in the middle sector, men will be mocked for letting women undertake the activities of men; and if it occurs in the last sec-
tor, children will become infant corpses. If it occurs between the male and female sectors, the gods of the upper valleys will be victorious;
if it occurs between the female and child sectors, the base of existence will be secured. It is said to be auspicious wherever a black dot ‘dies'.
The reader should note that on the plate the central dots of the middle and last sectors indicating auspicious readings should be black but
have been mistakenly represented as white. Similarly, the central dot in all three sectors indicating inauspicious readings should be
white, but all three have been misrepresented as white.
Conversely, if a white dot (indicative of personal well-being) dies', coinciding with the male sector, the life-principle
of the husband will be dissipated. Ifit coincides with the female sector, the life-principle of his spouse will go astray, and ifit coincides with
the child sector, a sheep fashioned of turquoise will be lost. Ifit occurs between the male and female sectors, dark delusion will grow; and ifit
occurs between the female and child sectors, plagues (dal-yams) will descend. In negative cases, counteractive rites should be undertaken.



302
The White Beryl
Divination of the degree to which the grid is overstepped (ling-tshe brgal-lam ma-brgah)
If in the first sector, the pine-tree is broken, the bridge has collapsed, the turquoise-coloured juniper has wilted or the wish-fulfilling tree
has withered, the grid will be overstepped and it will be inauspicious for males because the heavenly gate (gnam-sgo) will be impeded, and
the heavenly lifeline (yas-kyi 'ju-thag) will be severed. If in the middle sector, fortunate households are damaged, while unfortunate ones
are established, the grid will be overstepped and it will be inauspicious for females because demonic oppression will occur. If in the last
sector, there are many white ‘dying' eyes, the grid will have been overstepped and it will be inauspicious for children. If such circum-
stances pertain to either the first or middle sector, it will be inauspicious to the subject.
Specific rites are to be undertaken in negative cases – by one born in an ox, dragon, sheep or dog year if the pine-
tree of the vitality element or the wish-granting tree is broken; by one born in a horse or snake year if the pine-tree of the body element or
the turquoise-coloured juniper is broken; by one born in a tiger or hare year if the pine-tree of the destiny element or the golden bridge is
broken; and by one born in a bird or monkey year if the pine-tree of the luck element is broken, or the fortunate household damaged. In
particular, specific rites and sūtra recitations are recommended if the pebble indicative of the invalid's body element is very white, frac-
tionally white, piebald or fractionally black.
Plate 10, fig. 3
917FRANARUTI
1191
ཁས་བེ་མེས་པ་པོའི་ས་
།
་
། ལྟ་ཁྲམ་གཉིས་པའང་མེདཁྱིམ་་
།བཏང་གཅོད།
O pog
བྱ།བར
O 054g loooo
SOOooooo
OO0.
00 OO
OOOOOOOO
loooolo
Food
0.010
OOOOOO
Weo old
19oooo
O O ***0010000
© དྲག་
Mala
© - 010
000 OpO o@
TT
SOLO
Second grid or female sector (Inga-khram gnyis-pa bud-med khyim-gyi sa)
Third grid or child sector (Inga-khrram gsum-pa byis-pa gzhon-gyi sa)
Plate 10, fig. 3 (Ms l: ff. 42–46): Seven great divination methods (White Beryl, ff. 2775–280b)
Male, female and First grid or male sector (Inga-khram dang-po skyes-pa pho'l sa)
child sectors (pho-
sal mo-sal bu'l sa)
Names of the seven
four pine-
fifteen golden branches of
fruit of
fortunate and dying and
overstepping four pine-
fifteen golden branches of fruit of the
fortunate and dying and
overstepping four pine-
fifteen golden branches of
fruit of the
fortunate and dying and
overstepping
determining
tree chart
bridges chart turquoise
the wish-
unfortunate
living eyes
of the
tree chart
living eyes
of the
tree chart
bridges chart turquoise
wish-granting unfortunate
living eyes
of the
bridges chart turquoise wish-granting unfortunate
juniper chart tree chart household
divination
juniper chart
granting
household
chart
divination
chart
divination
juniper chart tree chart
household
chart
divination
tree chart
chart
grid chart
chart
grid chart
chart
grid chart
techniques (btang-
gcod-kyi rtsis 'gro-
bdun-gyi ming)
Symbols of the
sixteen white four white
four white
four white
four white
four white
if the six
sixteen white four white
four white
four white
four white
if the six
sixteen white four white
four white
four white
four white
four white
if the six
pebbles
vertical
extended
suspended
pebbles
pebbles
previous
pebbles
vertical
extended
four white
suspended
pebbles
pebbles
pebbles
previous
pebbles
vertical
extended
pebbles
seven auspicious
readings
(bzang-ba bdun)
previous
suspended
pebbles
pebbles
forming
pebbles
pebbles
pebbles
forming
with a
readings
pebbles
pebbles
forming
with a
readings
pebbles
pebbles
with a
readings
a square
central
are positive,
a square
central
are positive,
a square
central
are positive,
black
the mark
black
the mark
black
the mark
'dying'
will not be
dying'
will not be
'dying'
will not be
pebble
overstepped
pebble 16
overstepped
pebble 17
overstepped
(drug-ka dkar-
(drug-ka dkar-
na ma-rga)
(drug-ka dkar-
na ma-rgah
if the six
previous
na ma-rga)
if the six
four black
four black
four black
four black
four black
four black
four black
four black
Symbols of the sixteen black four black
seven inauspicious pebbles vertical
sixteen black four black
pebbles vertical
four black
extended
four black
suspended
four black
pebbles
four black
pebbles
if the six
previous
sixteen black four black
pebbles vertical
extended
suspended
pebbles
pebbles
extended
suspended
pebbles
pebbles
previous
readings
pebbles
pebbles
pebbles
forming a
with a
readings
pebbles
pebbles
pebbles
forming
with a
readings
pebbles
pebbles
pebbles
forming
with a
readings
(ngan-pa bdun)
square
central
are negative,
a square
central
are negative,
a square
central
are negative,
white
the mark
white
the mark
white
the mark
dying'
will be
'dying'
will be
'dying'
will be
pebble 18
overstepped
pebble 19
overstepped
pebble 20
overstepped
(drug-ka
(drug-ka
(drug-ka
nag-na rga)
nag-narga)
nag-na rga)



303
Divinations of ill-health
Recognising diseases and demons (White Beryl, ff. 2806–299a)
The recognition of diseases and demons (nad-dang gdon ngos-bzung) may be made on the basis of the log-men years, the trigrams, the days
or numeric squares. When the divination is made on the basis of the subject's log-men year (White Beryl, f. 281a/b), if the log-men coincides
with the subject's own year, the body will be prone to long-term diseases. If it coincides with an enemy aspect, it may portend death or
severe illness. If it coincides with a mother or friend aspect, it suggests a swift recovery with no long-term side-effects, and if it coincides
with a son-relationship, the prediction is neutral.
Specific predictions are given for each of the five elements in relation to each set of the twelve year-signs. For
example, if wood coincides with the mouse or ox year, the plague-causing spirits who dwell in trees (shing-gnyan) and the imprecatory
goddesses (ma-mo) will oppress women and cause afflictions. If the earth element coincides with the dragon or snake year, it may portend
death before the teeth are grown, and if earth coincides with the bird or monkey year there will be afflictions due to the demons of divorce,
the spirit lords of the soil and the ghosts of murder victims (gre-bo).
Some sources state that when the log-men coincides with the sectors of growth and decline (dar-gud), it portends
afflictions when the coincidence is with the four auspicious sectors, no affliction when it is with the four inauspicious sectors, and some
uncertainty when it coincides with the four average sectors.
IV. 1
1919103
གསབས་བྱས་པ་གཞན་གྱི་མན་་ར།
o
pen
O
O
O
597 loooo
དག་ན
Oo oo
མ་གལ།
0
0
100 ooloo
ooooooo
0 0 0
0 0 0
0 0 0
0 0
9000 qooc
O 39
དྲུ ག་ཀ་
དཀར་ན་
Wheur
O
དྲགཀ
འགན་
- मी
The seven great divination methods (rtsis-chen bdun) outlined
above (pp. 300–302) are summarised by Lo-chen Dharmaśrī in
the following verses (Moonbeams, f. 33b):
Thereafter, these sixteen 'divinatory eyes'2 1 are subsumed and examined
Within the context of the so-called 'seven great divinations':22
The pine-tree chart, the golden bridges,
The turquoise-coloured juniper, the wish-granting tree,
The fortunate and unfortunate households,
The tally of the dying and living eyes,
And the overstepping of the divination grid.
The pebbles should be divided into three groups of five, 23
And examined in relation to the successive sectors:
The first or male sector, the middle or female sector,
And the last or child sector.
When the divination is made on the basis of the subject's trigram (spar-kha'i nad ngos-bzung, White Beryl, ff. 2816–282b), the prognosis is
as follows. If the trigram is Li, there will be various demons causing fevers, head wounds and ailments of the upper part of the body. If the
trigram is Khon, diverse demons will provoke onerous and suffocating diseases, and aliments of the left side of the body and the left arm.
If the trigram is Dva, the various demons will induce heart diseases, pains of the ribs, and so forth. If the trigram is Kham, the demons will
bring ailments of the lower part of the body, calculus, kidney diseases and diarrhoea. If the trigram is Gin, the demons will bring serum
disorders, swellings and ailments of the right leg. If the trigram is Zin, the demons will inflict pains of the right ribs; and if the trigram is
Zon, they will provoke wind disorders, madness, ailments of the right arm and malaise of the upper part of the body.
When the divination is made on the basis of the days (nyi-ma'i nad-dang gdon ngos-bzung, White Beryl,
ff. 2826–283b), the prognosis is as follows. On the day of the mouse, which is light for males and heavy for females, various demons bring
afflictions of the joints and swellings. On the day of the ox, which is light for males and heavy for females, they bring palpitations of the
heart, fatigue, excessive serum, brain disorders, malaise of the stomach and liver, and disturbing dreams. On the day of the tiger, which is
heavy for males and light for females, they bring pains of the chest and back, dryness of the mouth, an imbalance of body temperature,
stiffness of the limbs, and pains of the kidneys or diaphragm. On the day of the hare, which is light for males and heavy for females, the
demons bring chest and brain disorders, lumbar pains and conjunctivitis. On the day of the dragon, which is light for females and heavy
for males, they bring severe diseases, brain disorders, lung and heart diseases, ailments of the lower viscera, malaise of the kidneys and
lumbar region, madness and diarrhoea. On the day of the snake, which is light for males and heavy for females, they bring blood disorder,
palpitations, perspiration and pains of the chest, ribs, cranium, eye-sockets or joints, together with loss of appetite and chronic ailments.
On the day of the horse, which is light for females and heavy for males, there will be giddiness, convulsions and shaking of the hands, cold
sweats, brain diseases, numbness of the eyes, pains or chills of the limbs, malaise of the heart and dryness of the mouth. On the day of the
sheep, which is light for males and heavy for females, they bring complex disorders which are hard to cure, or pains of the brain, waist and
neck. On the day of the monkey, which is light for males and heavy for females, they bring palpitations of the heart, brain diseases, dry-
ness of the mouth, loss of appetite, nausea, lung and heart diseases, pains of the small intestine or diaphragm, and an inclination to stay in
bed. On the day of the bird, which is light for males and heavy for females, they bring fevers of the solid viscera, especially the heart, pains
of the brain and the bones of the arms and legs, as well as fatigue and loss of appetite. On the day of the dog, which is light for males and
heavy for females, they bring palpitations of the body, fevers of the chest and lumbar region, temperature imbalances, eye diseases, and
breathlessness. Lastly, on the day of the pig, which is light for males and heavy for females, they bring exhaustion, breathlessness, tem-
perature imbalance, brain diseases, vomiting of blood, pains of the back, dermatitis, pustules and loss of appetite. Various detailed rituals
are prescribed when divinations are made concerning the most severe diseases inducing symptoms of impending death (White Beryl,
ff. 283–284b). The rituals vary according to the year-sign of the invalid.
When the divination is made on the basis of the numeric squares (sme-ba'i nad-gdon ngos-bzung, White Beryl,
ff. 2846–287b), the prognosis is as follows. If the numeric square is White One, there will be eye diseases, vertigo, wind disorders,



21
***
ai
er
Above Detail of Plate 10, fig. 2 (see p. 299), showing the four pine-
trees of vitality, body, destiny and luck
swellings or pains of the heart. If the numeric square is Black Two, there will be eye diseases, pains of the upper part of the body and
abdominal spasms. If the numeric square is Blue Three, there will be dropsy, tumours, ailments of the xiphoid, stomach or liver, or anuria.
If the numeric square is Green Four, there will be dermatitis, loss of weight, leprosy, haemorrhoids and swellings or ailments of the
limbs. If the numeric square is Yellow Five, there will be deafness, dumbness, stomach ailments, lethargy, contagious diseases, vomiting
of blood, disturbing dreams or ill temper. If the numeric square is White Six, there will be pains of the mouth, teeth, bones or heart, and
infectious or contagious diseases. If the numeric square is Red Seven, there will be strong pains, fevers, blood diseases, swellings or pus-
tules (phol-mig). If the numeric square is White Eight, there will be stooping of the body, contagious diseases, madness or pains. If the
numeric square is Red Nine, there will be brown-phlegm gastritis, plague (dal-yams), and pre-natal diseases, as well as contagious dis-
eases, blood disorders, wounds, menorrhagia or infantile eczema.
In general, all will be well if White One, Six and Eight coincide with the hour of sunrise, if Black Two and Blue
Three coincide with sunset, Green Four with late afternoon, Yellow Five with morning, and Red Seven or Red Nine with noon.
Different sorts of demon and curative means are also specified, depending on the relationship between the
numeric square of the hour and the natal numeric square. For example, if the numeric square of the hour forms a mother- or identity-rela-
tionship with the natal numeric square, the life-long companion gods ('go-lha) will bring their afflictions. If it forms an enemy- or son-
relationship, the retributional demons (lan-chags 'dre) will bring their afflictions; and if it forms a friend-relationship, the rter-btsog 'dre24
will bring their afflictions, particularly if they coincide with the sectors of growth (dar) rather than those of decline (gud).



305
Divinations of ill-health
Again, when the numeric squares are examined in relation to the years, months, days and hours, different readings may be made. When
they are contrasted with the year-signs, they determine good and bad years. When they are contrasted with the month-signs, they deter-
mine whether the ‘death-wish' (ro-'dod) is present or not. When they are contrasted with the days, they determine whether the lifespan is
long or short; and when they are contrasted with the hours, they determine whether death will arise or not. Predictions and diagnoses of
diverse ailments (including demonic possession, madness and poisoning) are then made depending on whether these coincide with a sec-
tor of growth or of decline.
When the main practice of diagnosing diseases through the combination of numeric squares, trigrams and year-
signs is actually implemented (dngos-gzhi nad_kyi ngos-bzung, White Beryl, f. 2875–290a), five pebbles are placed, four representing the
elements of the year, month, day and hour and one representing the majority element among these; while the trigram is identified with
the element corresponding to the month.
In general, wood suggests wind disorders; fire, blood disorders; earth, bile disorders; iron, phlegm disorders; and
water, cold disorders. Specific readings are then given for different combinations of these five elements. For example, if there are three
fire and two earth elements, it portends void fevers. If there is one fire and four wood or wind elements it portends concealed fevers. If
there are two fire and three earth elements it portends chronic fevers. If there are four fire and one wood or wind element it portends tur-
bid fevers. If there is one fire and four earth elements it portends irritation fevers. If there are two fire and three air elements it portends
agitation fevers. If there are four fire elements and one iron element it portends contagious fevers, and so forth.
Briefly expressed, diseases associated with the fire element affect the head and the upper part of the body; those
associated with the earth element affect the limbs, the spleen and the stomach; those associated with the water element affect the lower
part of the body, the bladder, kidneys and perinephritic area; those associated with the wood element affect the right side of the body,
along with the channels and the liver; while those associated with the iron element affect the left side of the body, along with the lungs,
large intestine and bones.
Incidental readings may also be predicted on the basis of the planets and constellations (White Beryl, f. 290a/b).
For example, the coincidence of Sunday may portend potentially fatal ailments of the head. Monday may portend poisoning, Tuesday
sudden blood disorders or fevers, Wednesday demonic possession, Thursday secondary diseases and imprecations, Friday minor ail-
ments, and Saturday ailments of the limbs and joints. Similarly, ailments coinciding with the constellation Asvinī (dbyug-gu) may portend
recovery within three days, those coinciding with Bharaṇī (bra-nye) portend the risk of fatality, and so forth.
The diverse physical diseases are also associated with the different elements on external, internal or sensory lev-
els. For example, diseases afflicting the bones indicate an external object associated with iron; while those of the lungs indicate the corre-
sponding inner organ; and those of the nose – including blockage of the nasal cavities, purulence and discharge of serum - the correspon-
ding sense organ. Similarly, ailments of the upper part of the body indicate an external object associated with fire, while those of the heart
and small intestine indicate the corresponding inner organs, and those of the tongue and teeth indicate the corresponding sense organ.
Ailments of the region below the navel indicate an external object associated with water, while those of the kidneys indicate the corre-
sponding inner organ, and those of the ears the corresponding sense organ. Ailments of the lumbar region indicate the external object
associated with wood, while those of the stomach, liver and genitals indicate the corresponding inner organs, and those of the eyes and
teeth – including cataracts, conjunctivitis and gingivitis – indicate the corresponding sense organs. Lastly, ailments of the limbs and
head indicate the external object associated with earth, while those of the spleen and small intestine indicate the corresponding inner
organs, and those of the limbs – including swelling of the lips and infectious skin diseases (shu-thor) – indicate the corresponding sense
organ. It is important, therefore, to understand what should be avoided and what should be undertaken in relation to the external objects
influencing such elemental diseases, as indicated in the text (White Beryl, ff. 2906–291a).
When these various categories of disease are examined in conjunction with a nativity divination, the predictions
vary according to the five elements (White Beryl, f. 291a/b). The predictions resemble those already enumerated in the preceding chapter
and illustrated in Plate 9, fig. 18 and Plate 10, fig. 4. As such, the character and physical appearance of the subject may be determined,
along with information concerning the subject's relatives, the entrance to the subject's house, his neighbours, his clothes, property, diet,
pillow, fields and hostile spirits.
According to the exegesis known as gDon-'dzin bgegs-kyi spu-gri, the main afflictions of ill-health and counterac-
tive remedies may also be predicted by combining the twelve sectors of growth and decline with the twelve animal signs, and linking
these to the destiny elements of the male subject and his wife, as explained in White Beryl, ff. 2916–294a. Specific remedies are then given
in the case of ailments occurring when an element in an enemy-relationship with the vitality, destiny or luck element coincides with a sec-
tor of growth, or an element in an enemy-relationship with the body element coincides with a sector of decline (f. 294b), and also in the
case of ailments coinciding with the eight distinct trigrams (ff. 2946–295a). If the elements indicative of vitality, body, destiny and luck
coincide with the sectors of decline - particularly with the death and tomb sectors - death may well ensue, and appropriate counteractive
rites must be undertaken.
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises this aspect of the recognition of diseases and demons in the following verses (Moonbeams, ff. 336–34a):
Furthermore, the examination of diseases and demonic influences, 25 and so forth,
Associated with the log-men years, trigrams, numeric squares and days,
Should be known from the extensive texts on this subject].
The predictions for making accurate divination on such matters
With fervent higher aspiration for the sake of living beings afflicted by ill-health
Should be determined through their respective commentaries.
Agitation (of the elements) should be cured, decline should be healed,
And the demonic forces of disruptive thought should be dispelled.26



Divinations of death



308
The White Beryl
According to Sangs-rgyas rGy-mtsho, the techniques of divination concerning death (gshin-rtsis) comprise both those focusing on the
living rather than the dead and those focusing on the dead rather than the living. Lo-chen Dharmaśrī extracts one section from the latter
to form a third distinct category, known as the 'examination of funeral ceremonies’. As he himself states (Moonbeams, f. 34a):
In order to dispel the misery of living (relatives] who are left behind,
When the lifespan of corporeal beings comes to an end,
The life-spirit, mind and mental faculty are successively
Carried off by Yama's agents, 2
[Which arises) dependent on the (deceased's] body
And owing to attachment to bodily objects,
There is the funeral divination technique. 3
This has three parts: (calculations] based on the living rather
than the dead. 4
[Calculations) based on the dead, rather than the living, 5
And the examination of funeral ceremonies. 6
And one roams throughout the six realms of existence.
Prognostications based on the living rather than the dead
(White Beryl, ff. 343–344b, 348b-349a)
Here the divination technique examines the times at which death may emerge, based on calculations pertaining to the living relatives
(gson-gyi-rtsis-khong nas gshin-'don dus-brtag-pa). According to Moonbeams, 'twenty fixed pebbles' (nges-can rde'u nyi-shu) are to be
employed." The diviner should prepare a grid on a white felt mat positioned to the right, the number of sectors corresponding to the
number of living family members. These should be arranged in order of seniority and gender.
One pebble is then placed representing the year-sign of each of these family members, along with four represent-
ing the distinctions between their vitality, body, destiny and luck elements in relation to the present year, one coloured pebble represent-
ing the current numeric square, and another representing the current trigram. Pebbles representing the five growth and decline sectors
of the vitality, body, destiny, luck and numeric square (dar-gud rdel-lnga) are then positioned to the right; and the seven harsh pebbles
(rtsub-rde bdun) to the left, black ones being inversely cast as white. The final pebble symbolises the subject's natal numeric square.
Variously coloured pebbles are to be utilised. One black pebble represents a pig sign, and two a mouse sign. One
green pebble represents a tiger sign, and two a hare sign. One red pebble represents a snake sign, and two a horse sign. One white pebble
represents a monkey sign, and two a bird sign. One to four yellow pebbles respectively represent an ox, dragon, snake and dog sign. One
pebble is placed to represent a wood destiny element, two a fire destiny element, and three for earth, four for iron, and five for water. One
white pebble stands for White One, one black pebble for Black Two, one blue pebble for Blue Three, one green pebble for Green Four,
one yellow pebble for Yellow Five, a pair of white pebbles for White Six, one red pebble for Red Seven, three white pebbles for White
Eight, and two red pebbles for Red Nine. In more elaborate applications, diverse pebbles may additionally be cast to identify the planets
and constellations, as well as the multiple of nine and the tomb-sign. For each family member there will be a different reading. Exemplary
chart 9.1 is based on the Bai-dkar bu-yig gshin-rtsis khra-ma'i dper-brjod gnad-bsdus.
Current numeric
Seven harsh pebbles
square (babs-rme)
(rtsub-bdun)
= Green 4
9.1 Calculation of the twenty fixed pebbles that examine the time of death based on the living relatives rather than the dead (gson-khongs-nas gshin-'don -gyi rde-grangs nges-can nyi-shu): Model chart for the current iron mouse year (4 pebbles plus 2 black pebbles)
Name (ming)
44-year-old male subject of Pebbles of growth and Current trigram Current numeric Seven harsh pebbles
Name (ming)
29-year-old female subject of Pebbles of growth Current trigram
water sheep year
decline (dar-gud (babs-spar) square (babs-rme) (rtsub-bdun)
earth dragon year
and decline (dar-gud (babs-span) = Gin
(gson chu-lug lo'i zhe-bzh)
= Zon
= Green 4
(gson sa-'brug lo'i nyer-dgu)
Vitality (srog)
earth (3 pebbles)
00
1.0
vitality (srog)
earth (3 pebbles)
Body (lus)
wood (1 pebble)
XX
body (lus)
wood (1 pebble)
0
XX
Destiny (dbang) water (5 pebbles)
3.0
destiny (dbang)
earth (3 pebbles)
4.0
U
00
1.0
2.0
2.0
X
00
3.0
4.X
Luck (klung)
fire (2 pebbles)
5.0
XX
5.0
luck (klung)
natal numeric square
wood (1 pebble)
White 6 (2 white pebbles)
Natal numeric square
Red 9 (2 red pebbles)
6.0
0
ОХ
6.0
(skyes-rme)
7.0
(skyes-rme)
7.0
The readings based on the layout of pebbles in this system will be outlined in the following section. Lo-chen Dharmaśrī describes the
placement of these pebbles in the following verses (Moonbeams, ff. 34a-35a):
First, the pebble representing the subject's year-sign should
Below these, there is the pebble representing the current
First, [in the divination] based on the living rather than the dead,
There are twenty fixed pebbles.
Then, the five pebbles representing the growth and decline sectors
Of [the living relative's] vitality, body, destiny, luck and numeric square
be placed
numeric square:
These comprise [one pebble each representing]
During the first seasonal months, it itself comprises two pebbles,
It comprises: one white (pebble] for White One,
Should be placed to the side and the seven harsh pebbles to the rear.
The [living relative's] year, vitality, body, destiny, luck,
And during the middle seasonal months, a single pebble,
Thereafter, one pebble representing the natal numeric square
trigram and numeric square,
Their colour corresponding to the month's) own element;
Two white (pebbles) for White Six,
And three white (pebbles) for White Eight.
One black (pebble) represents Black Two,
Should be placed, as in the [aforementioned) manner of the current
Five representing the sectors of growth and decline,
While during the final seasonal months,
numeric square.
It comprises two mottled or variegated pebbles.
In this way, there are twenty pebbles (altogether).
In front of that one, there are four pebbles representing the contrast
Seven harsh pebbles (rtsub-bdun),
And one representing the natal numeric square (skyes-sme).
Now, these 'pebbles of the living (relatives)' (gson-rde)
Should be placed in succession and without error,
On a (white) felt mat (symbolic) of the living, positioned to the right,
Starting with (those of the eldest brother
Two [black ones) represent Blue [Three),
And three [black ones) represent Green Four.
One of each represent Yellow Five,
While one red (pebble) indicates Red Seven,
And two red (pebbles) indicate Red Nine.
Between the (subject's] vitality, body, destiny and luck
And the present year.
When the pebbles are laid out] more extensively,
They should be positioned as in the Divination of Obstacle Years. 10
The general and particular predictions are then applied. 11
It is important that one also intellectually determines without error
The rituals for averting disasters 12 which beset the living,
The funeral ceremonies 13 for the dead, and so forth.
And below these, is the pebble indicative of the current trigram.
And ending with (those of] youngest brother,
These should be placed as before, either identical [in colour]
The number of break-lines being determined by the composition
or variegated.
of the family. 9



309
Divinations of death
The actual prognostications
If the paternal relatives or family members collectively have a majority of year-signs in a fourth-removed adversarial aspect (gshed-bzhi)
or a seventh-removed aspect (bdun-zur), as illustrated on Plate 11, fig. 2, death will eventually come due to blood feud or conflict. For
example, the bird and hare are the fourth-removed adversarial year-signs (bzhi-gshed) corresponding to the mouse year, while the horse
is the seventh-removed year-sign corresponding to the mouse year.
OS
ལོ་བཅུ་གཉིས།
སོ་སོའི་བཞི་གཤེད།
>
A
ccess
(
སོ་སོའི་བདྲེན་སླར་
Plate 11, fig. 2
ОХ
bird
dog
pig
Plate 11, fig. 2 (Ms I: ff. 48–50): Prognostications of death due to blood feuds and conflict when paternal relatives or family members collectively have a majority of year-signs in a bzhi-gshed or bdun-zuraspect (White Beryl, f. 348b)
If the subject's year-sign among the twelve years mouse
tiger
hare
dragon
snake
horse
sheep
monkey
of the cycle (lo bcu-gnyis) is as follows
death due to blood feuds or conflict is portended bird; hare dog; dragon pig; snake mouse; horse ox; sheep tiger; monkey bird; hare dragon; dog snake; pig
when the majority of paternal relatives or family
horse; mouse
sheep; ox
monkey; tiger
death due to blood feud and
conflict is predicted
members have the corresponding fourth-removed
adversarial year-sign (so-so'i bzhi-gshed)
or the majority of paternal relatives or
family members have the corresponding
seventh-removed year-sign (so-so'i bdun-zur)
horse
sheep
monkey
bird
dog
pig
mouse
ОХ
tiger
hare
dragon
snake
Also, as illustrated on Plate 11, fig. 3, if the paternal relatives predominantly are of a water constitutional type and of the pig or mouse
year, but one or two of them are of the horse or snake year (which is in a friend-relationship), it portends that the house will be flooded due
to malevolent forces (bdud) and ogres (srin-po), and special remedial funeral rites should be undertaken at the tombs. If they are predomi-
nantly of an iron constitutional type, and of the bird or monkey year, but one or two of them are of the tiger or hare year (which is in a
friend-relationship), it portends that a sandalwood tree will be encircled and hacked by many axe-wielding malevolent forces; it will help,
however, if one moves to another house, and transfers the tombs. If they are predominantly of a fire constitutional type, and of the horse
or snake sign, but one or two of them are of the bird or monkey year (which is in a friend-relationship), it portends ill-omens for the sub-
ject, such as a “copper needle falling into a campfire', and it will be beneficial to move the tombs. If they are predominantly of an earth con-
stitutional type, and of the ox, dragon, sheep or dog sign, but one or two of them are of the mouse or pig years (which are in a friend-rela-
tionship), it portends that malevolent forces and ogres will cause a mountain avalanche near to an illustrious spring, but it will help if one
steps aside or flees. If they are predominantly of a wood constitutional type, and of the tiger or hare sign, but one or two of them are of the
ox, dragon, sheep or dog years (which are in a friend-relationship), it portends that a magnificent tree will fall down upon the kitchen
stove, but it will help if one undertakes military conscription elsewhere.
དྲས་སྔའི་ཕཚན་ལ་དབང་
INGAT
གྲོགས་ལ་རེ་གས་བྱང་ས།
ce
དུན་པའི་འབྲས་བུ།
HEEGA
Plate 11, fig. 3
Plate 11, fig. 3 (Ms l: ff. 48–50): Prognostications of death consequent on paternal relatives or family members predominantly having a certain constitutional type, when a minority have a year-sign in a friend-relationship (White Beryl, f. 348b)
mouse; pig
bird; monkey
horse; snake
ox; sheep; dog; dragon
tiger; hare
When paternal relatives predominantly have their
destiny years sharing one of the following five
constitutional types (rus-Inga'i pha-tshan-la
dbang-lo mang-ba)
but one or two relatives have year-signs in one of
the following corresponding friend-relationships
(grogs-lo re gnyis byung-ba)
the following inauspicious outcomes are
horse; snake
tiger; hare
bird; monkey
dog; pig
ox; sheep; dog; dragon
A sandalwood tree will be encircled and hacked
It portends ill-omen for the subject, like a
Malevolent forces (bdud) and ogres (srin-po)
A magnificent tree will fall down upon the
The house will be flooded due to malevolent
forces (bdud) and ogres (srin-po), and special
portended (ngan-pa'i 'bras-bu)
by many axe-wielding malevolent forces (bdud),
'copper needle falling into a campfire', and
will cause a mountain avalanche, near to an
kitchen stove, but it will help if one undertakes
remedial funeral rites should be undertaken
but it will help if one moves to another house,
it will be beneficial to move the tombs.
military conscription elsewhere.
illustrious spring, but it will help if one steps
aside or flees.
at the tombs.
and transfers the tombs.



310
The White Beryl
Similarly, regarding the natal numeric squares of the paternal relatives, as illustrated on Plate 11, fig. 4, if the numeric squares
White One, Six or Eight are in the majority, it portends that there is a danger of punishment due to gods (deva), but it will help if
one avoids anger and blood feuds, and performs ablutions with the ritual vase before going off in pursuit of one's object. If Black Two is
in the majority, it portends that the ancestral graves will be abandoned, so that there will be many fatalities due to serious
diseases, wounds, colic and muscular spasm (gzer-lhog). However, it will help if the devouring spirits (za-'dre) are averted. If Green
Four is in the majority, it portends that the paternal ancestors will be afflicted by the spirit lords of the soil, or the land and house will
be possessed by them, but it will help if rituals to appease the serpentine spirits and rites of exorcism are undertaken. If Yellow Five is
in the majority, it portends that the paternal ancestors, Bon or Buddhist, will be displeased, and that the protectors on whom one
should rely are alienated. It will help if supreme meditation practices and rites of aversion are performed. If Red Seven or Nine are
in the majority, it portends that the paternal ancestors will die of weapon wounds, or else a conflict like the clash of water and rocks
will persist. It will help in such cases if the body or mind are transmuted. Lastly, if Blue Three is in the majority, it portends the same
outcome as Black Two.
In general, as far as predictions concerning the paternal relatives are concerned, if the basic pebble representing
the vitality element is black, rites of longevity should be performed. If the pebble representing the body element is black, paternal rela-
tives will be exposed to serious infectious diseases, and appropriate counteractive recitations should be undertaken. If the pebble repre-
senting the destiny element is black, there will be loss of wealth. If the pebble representing the luck element is black, there will be much
defamation, so that hostile treacherous spirits (sri) and enemies should be suppressed and opposed.
Plate 11, fig. 4
སྐྱེས་སྨ་མང་ཚོགས ༡༨ ༨
། ༢ ༢༢
སྐྱོན་འབྲས།
Plate 11, fig. 4 (Ms I: ff. 48–50): Prognostications of death consequent on paternal relatives or family members predominantly having a certain natal numeric square (White Beryl, ff. 3486–349a)
When paternal relatives or family members
White 1/6/8
Black 2
Green 4
Yellow 5
Red 7/9
Blue 3
predominantly have one of the following natal
numeric squares (skyes-sme mang-tshogs)
the following defective outcomes are portended
There is a danger of punishment due to
The paternal ancestors will be afflicted by
The paternal ancestors, Bon or Buddhist,
The paternal ancestors will die of weapon
[The same as Black 2.)
The ancestral graves will be abandoned.
so that there will be many fatalities due
(skyon-'bras)
gods (deva).
the spirit lords of the soil, or the land and
will be displeased, and the protectors on
wounds, or else a conflict like the clash of
to serious diseases, wounds, colic
house will be possessed by them.
whom one should rely will be alienated.
water and rocks will persist.
and muscular spasm (gzer-lhog).
Prognostications based on the dead rather than the living
(White Beryl, ff. 344b-348b, 349a-418a)
Here the divination technique examines matters of importance to the bereaved relatives, based on calculations pertaining to the dead
(gshin-gyis gson-la brtsi-ba). It comprises the 'twelve pebbles of the life-spiriť, along with their relevant predictions, and the fifteen
categories of divination that refer specifically to the dead rather than the living (gshin-khog gson-'don). The former technique utilises the
pebbles of the life-spirit (bla-rdel) in order to make predictions concerning the bereaved relatives, while the latter employs the pebbles of
the deceased (gshin-rdel) in order to examine the funeral and tomb.
The twelve pebbles of the life-spirit (bla-rdel bcu-gnyis, White Beryl, ff. 349a-351b)
In order to determine certain predictions in respect of bereaved household members, including in-laws, children and widowed persons, it
is important to identify the constitutional type of the deceased subject.
Then, as illustrated on Plate 11, fig. 5, the twelve categories of year forming a relationship with the constitutional
type should be identified. These comprise: the years of greater and lesser penalty, the greater and lesser years in a mother-relationship,
the greater and lesser years of destiny, the greater and lesser years in a son-relationship, the greater and lesser years in an enemy-rela-
tionship, and the greater and lesser years in a friend-relationship
In the case of the wood constitutional type, for example, the sheep and ox years are respectively those of greater
and lesser penalty, the tiger and hare years are respectively those of greater and lesser destiny, the mouse and pig years are respectively
those of greater and lesser mother-relationship, the horse and snake years are respectively those of greater and lesser son-relationship,
the dragon and dog years are respectively those of greater and lesser friend-relationship, while the monkey and bird years are respec-
tively those of greater and lesser enemy-relationship.
Three black pebbles are then placed to represent the deceased's year of greater penalty, two black ones to repre-
sent the year of lesser penalty, two white ones to represent the greater and lesser years in a mother-relationship, one white one to repre-
sent the greater and lesser years of destiny, a pair of black and white pebbles to represent the greater and lesser years in a son-relation-
ship, one black one to represent the greater and lesser years in an enemy-relationship, and two white ones to represent the greater and
lesser years in a friend-relationship. The prognostications will vary depending on whether the pebble representing the year-sign of the
bereaved relative for whom the reading is made coincides with the black or white pebbles. 14



311.
Divinations of death
»
V
uc
(((cccccc
རས་ལྔའི་ཟླ
གས།
3ཆད་ཆེན། འཆར་ཆུང་
དབང་ལཚ། དབར་ལ་ཆང མ་ལ་ཆེ། |མ་ལ་རྒྱུར བུ་ལེ་ཆེ།
འུ་ལོ་ཆུང། གྲོག་ལོ་སྨ གྲོགོ་ལོ་ཆུ་རགྲ་ལེ་ དགྲ་ལ་རྒྱུ་
Plate 11, fig. 5
wood
Plate 11, fig. 5 (Ms 1: ff. 48–50): The twelve pebbles of the life-spirit (bla-rdel bcu-gnyis; White Beryl, ff. 349–351b)
wood
sheep
Ox
tiger
hare
fire
dog
dragon
h orse
snake
ОХ
hare
p
bird
mouse
tiger
ig
hare
horse
sheep
snake
x
dragon
monkey
dog
bird
monkey
mouse
o
pig
earth
dragon
dog
sheep
ox
horse
snake
monkey
bird
mouse
pig
tiger
hare
iron
ОХ
monkey
bird
dragon
dog
mouse
pig
tiger
hare
horse
snake
sheep
dog
water
dragon
mouse
pig
monkey
bird
tiger
hare
horse
snake
sheep
ОХ
are the elemental forms are the corresponding
are the corresponding
are the corresponding
are the corresponding
are the corresponding
are the corresponding
are the corresponding
are the corresponding
are the corresponding
are the corresponding
are the corresponding
are the corresponding
years of lesser penalty
greater years in a
greater years in a
lesser years in a
greater years in a
lesser years in a
greater years in an
lesser years in an
of the five constitutional years of greater penalty
types (rus-Inga'i gzugs) ('chad-chen)
lesser years in a
destiny relationship
greater years in a
mother-relationship
lesser years in a
mother-relationship
(chad-chung
destiny relationship
son-relationship
son-relationship
friend-relationship
friend-relationship
enemy-relationship
(dgra-lo che)
enemy-relationship
(dgra-lo chung)
(dbang-lo chen)
(dbang-lo chung)
(ma-lo che)
(ma-lo chung
(bu-lo che)
(bu-lo chung
(grogs-lo che)
(grogs-lo chung
The actual prognostications
When these twelve types of pebble have been positioned, the diviner will refer to the corresponding general, particular and special predic-
tions. Among these, there are special predictions for each of the twelve relationship years depending on whether the pebble representing
the bereaved relative's year-sign coincides with a black or white sector. For example, if the pebble is black and corresponds to the deceased's
year of greater penalty, it coincides with the tomb sector (dur-gyi-sa) and portends isolation from parents and grandparents, imprecations,
the criticism of a teacher, and so forth. Ifthe pebble is black and corresponds to the deceased's year of lesser penalty, it coincides with the sec-
tor in a mother-relationship to the tomb sector (dur-gyi ma) and portends that females will usurp the role of males, the wife will lose her rep-
utation even if she becomes wealthy, the husband will kill the wife, or the wife will die due to serious ailments, and so forth. Readings can
also be made collectively for a single family, in which case the predictions vary according to whether the majority of family members have a
year-sign coinciding with the year of greater penalty, and so forth, or whether the majority share one or other of the nine numeric squares.
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises this technique in the following verses (Moonbeams, f. 35a/b):
Alternatively, it says in the Root Tantra (rtsa-ba) that
The actual pebbles indicative of the result22
Secondly, there are the pebbles of the life-spirit,
Which determine the (emergence of signs pertaining to the living
Based on the (divinations of the dead.
These should be placed as in the ſaforementioned) divination of the living, 15
Or else, three black pebbles should be placed on the year of greater penalty, 16
Two black pebbles on the year of lesser penalty,"?
Two large white (pebbles) on the greater year in a mother-relationship, 18
Should be placed, respectively as white and black,
Upon the (subject's] own year-sign and its seventh-removed aspect (bdun-zur),
With accuracy, and directly in front of their respective corresponding pebbles. 2
However, since there is no custom of doing so in current practice,
At this juncture, I shall desist from so doing.
Two small white (pebbles) on the lesser year in a mother-relationship,19
The predictions corresponding to these pebbles should be collectively determined
After examining whatever negative or positive features there are
And similarly, one white (pebble) on the subject's] own year,20
One black and one white (pebble) on (each of] the years in a son-relationship,
One black (pebble) on (each of the years in an enemy-relationship,
And two white and one black (pebbles) on (each of the years in] a
In respect of the general, particular and special tomb sectors. 25
friend-relationship.
Large and small pebbles should be placed without error,
Respectively upon those greater and lesser years. 21
The fifteen categories of divination based on the dead rather than the living (gshin-khog gson-'don bstan-pa, White Beryl, ff. 351a-418)
The pebbles representing death (gshin-rde'u) are deployed on a mat of black felt or sackcloth positioned to the left. There are fifteen
modes of inspection concerning: timely and untimely death ('chi-dus); the faults and retributions inherent in the trigrams (snyad-dang le-
lan); demonic influences ('dre-gdon sus khyer-ba); the appropriate funeral status ('dur-thang); subsequent rebirth (phyi-ma'i skye-gnas); Bon
and Buddhist funerals compatible with the accumulation of fundamental virtues (ra-mdar dge-rtsa bzang-bas 'dur-ba'i lugs); distinctive



312
The White Beryl
Opposite Detail of Plate 11, fig. 6 (see p. 315), showing predictions
of untimely death in respect of a subject's vitality, body and
destiny elements
types of corpse (ro-rigs-dbye-ba); funerals based on the distinct calculations of the five elements ('byung-Inga sil-buli rtsis-kyi dur-thob);
accoutrements and disposal of the corpse (ro-chas-dang ro-rdzongs); the recurrence of death (ro-zlos-pa); the eye of death (shi-mig); the
direction of corpse disposal (gshin-po'i phung-po gtong-rim); the important means of warding off irritations associated with death, which
may end the family line (shi-'grams sgab-bcad-par bya-ba'i thabs-gnad); public funeral ceremonies (shid-kyi ston-mo khrom-rtsis); and the
funeral procession, along with the selection of the funeral site and the recitations pertaining to the five kinds of funeral (dur-rdzongs-dang
sa-'tshol dur-Inga'i smrang-sgo). In Moonbeams (ff. 351–36a), Lo-chen Dharmaśrī subsumes these differently within twelve categories, and
under a third distinct heading, which he entitles 'funeral ceremonies' ('dur-shid):
Thirdly, there are the funeral ceremonies held on behalf of the deceased,
Which are represented by one hundred and ninety-nine (divination) pebbles.
These are divided into the following twelve categories:
The deceased's vitality, body, destiny, luck, [year-sign) element, 26
Trigram, and even or odd (numeric square),
Along with the five types of funeral, 27
The types of corpse, the direction of corpse disposal,
The place of rebirth, and the concluding ritual charms (gto). 28
Now a jet-black mat representing the deceased should be laid to the left side,
And the pebbles representing the deceased?' are placed upon it.
1. Predictions concerning timely and untimely death
('chi-dus, White Beryl, ff. 351b-353a)
There are eight aspects to the divination of timely and untimely death, and these are based respectively on the subject's vitality, body,
destiny, luck, constitutional type,90 trigram, numeric square and year-sign. The first four of them are illustrated on Plate 11, fig. 6, while
the last three are presented on Supplementary Plate 19, figs 3–5.
Fifty-eight pebbles are generally employed, in addition to the pebbles of symbolic recognition, as outlined in
exemplary chart 9.2, prepared for a subject of the fire horse year, which is derived from Bai-dkar bu-yig gshin-rtsis khra-ma'i dper-brjod
gnad-bsdus. 31
9.2 Exemplary chart
Name (ming)
Pebbles of symbolic
Vitality element of
Body element of
deceased (lus) = water
Destiny element of
deceased (dbang) = fire
Luck element of
deceased (klung) = iron
Constitutional type of
deceased (khams)
deceased (srog) = fire
present year of death
recognition (ngos-'dzin)
3 pebbles (=earth)
5 pebbles (=water)
0x
XX
ОХ
0
0 0
ОХ
log-men year
XX
XX
ОХ
current trigram
ОХ
0
00
00
current numeric square
ОХ
XX
0
00
growth and decline
ОХ
XX
month
XX
day
1 pebble (= wood)
3 pebbles (= earth)
3 pebbles (= earth)
5 pebbles (= water)
3 pebbles (= earth)
1 pebble (= wood)
4 pebbles (=iron)
4 pebbles (=iron)
3 pebbles (= earth)
ox
planet
0
constellation
00
00
hour
00
00
pebble of conclusive analysis
ОХ
00
XX
ox
Numeric square portending timely death: X
Trigram portending timely death:X
Year-sign portending timely death:X
According to Lo-chen Dharmaśrī, only fifty-six pebbles are positioned in this mode of divination, which includes within it the first five of
his twelve categories. As he himself says (Moonbeams, f. 36a):
The first five categories comprise the deceased's vitality, body, destiny, luck and constitutional type.
[For each of these), there are eleven basic pebbles (rtsa-rde),
Respectively representing the present year, the log-men, the numeric square,
The trigram, the sectors of growth and decline, the month, the day,
The hour, the planet, the constellation, and the year-sign of the most senior living relative (gson-lo).
These are [contrasted), examined and analysed in terms of growth and decline,
And pebbles then placed as white or black,
In the manner of the [previous) pebbles [used for the divination of the living. *2
Altogether, there are fifty-five pebbles (representing these five categories).
In addition, there is a single pebble representing the contrast
Between the vitality elements of the living and the dead.
Thus, with the completion of the conclusive analysis of the [year-sign] element,
There are (up to this point] fifty-six pebbles.
The actual prognostications
Among the seven aspects, the first analysis concerns whether the death of the subject's vitality element is timely or not. If the pebble of
conclusive analysis is black, it portends that the tree of vitality will be fractured, the wheel of life will break, a black bird will hover above
and a black dog will bite. The lifespan will be interrupted by demons, and death will ensue within three years. If this pebble of conclusive



A
అందుకు
అనుమతులు
Ca
A
సము



314
The White Beryl
analysis is white, however, it portends that the death will be untimely. Deceived by lifelong companion gods ('go-lha), one will be carried
off to a lake, where the body will be torn asunder.
The second analysis concerns whether the subject's body element has the death-wish or not. If the pebble of con-
clusive analysis is black, it portends that death is timely and that the body does have the death-wish. The wish-granting tree of the illu-
sory body will be hacked by the axe of ill-health, The body will be afflicted by unremitting ailments, eventually resting at its tomb, while
the mind falls into an abyss. However, if this pebble of conclusive analysis is white, it portends that there is no death-wish, but that
untimely death will occur and one will be captured by gods and demons, even though one does not intend to wield an axe to cut the wish-
granting tree, or even though one does not think that one will be fettered.
The third analysis concerns whether the subject's destiny element has sufficient sustenance or not. If the pebble
of conclusive analysis is black, it portends that sustenance will be insufficient, and that the tongue will vomit whatever is in the mouth,
while all that one possesses will be squandered through the open door of the house. Even though hybrid cattle or 'bri enter the house,
only a two-year-old bearded goat will remain within, so that food and clothing will be insufficient, suggesting a timely death. However, if
this pebble of conclusive analysis is white, it portends that one's good fortune will be interrupted by an untimely end, even though one
thinks that one's share of food, clothing and prosperity will not be disrupted, inasmuch as one presently appears to have sufficient food,
clothing and potency.
The fourth analysis concerns whether the branches of the eight-petalled lotus of the subject's luck element are
damaged or not. If the pebble of conclusive analysis is black, it portends a timely death. The victory banner of meritorious past actions
will collapse, the sun and moon will set in the heavens and past merits will be exhausted, while one will have no opportunity to gather
subsequent merits, and bad reputation will flare, bringing involuntary death. If this pebble of conclusive analysis is white, however, it
portends an untimely death and one's past merits will be stolen by demons, even though one presently has no idea that one will be cre-
mated, buried at sea, or interred underground.
Plate 11, fig. 6 (Ms I: ff. 48–50): Predictions concerning timely and untimely death (White Beryl, ff. 3516–353a)
symbolised by three crossed vajras
When the vitality element is white
symbolised by three crossed vajras
(srog dkar-ba)
When the vitality element is black
(srog nag-pa)
the outcome for the vitality aspect is as
follows (srog 'bras)
The tree of vitality will be fractured, the wheel
the outcome for the vitality aspect is as
follows (srog 'bras)
Death will be untimely. Deceived by lifelong
companion gods ('go-lha), one will be carried off
of life will break, a black bird will hover above
and a black dog will bite. The lifespan will be
to a lake, where the body will be torn asunder.
interrupted by demons, and death will ensue
within three years.
symbolised by three wheels
symbolised by three wheels
When the body element is black (lus nag-pa)
the outcome for the body aspect is as
Death is timely and the body does have the
When the body element is white (lus dkar-ba)
the outcome for the body aspect is as
follows (lus-'bras)
There is no death-wish, but untimely death will occur
follows (lus-'bras)
death-wish. The wish-granting tree of the
and one will be captured by gods and demons, even
illusory body will be hacked by the axe of ill-
though one does not intend to wield an axe to cut
health. The body will be afflicted by unremitting
ailments, eventually resting at its tomb, while
the mind falls into an abyss.
the wish-granting tree, or even though one does not
think that one will be fettered.
When the destiny element is black
symbolised by three svāstikas
symbolised by three svāstikas
When the destiny element is white
(dbang-thang dkar-ba)
(dbang-thang nag-pa)
the outcome for the destiny aspect is as
follows (dbang-'bras)
One's good fortune will be interrupted by an untimely
Sustenance will be insufficient, the tongue vomiting
whatever is in the mouth, while all that one has will
the outcome for the destiny aspect is as
follows (dbang-'bras)
end, though one thinks that one's share of food,
be squandered through the open door of the house.
Even though hybrid cows or 'bri enter the house,
clothing and prosperity will not be disrupted
inasmuch as one presently appears to have sufficient
food, clothing and potency.
only a two-year-old bearded goat will remain within,
so that food and clothing will be insufficient,
suggesting a timely death.
symbolised by three lotus flowers
symbolised by three lotus flowers
When the luck element is white
(klung-rta dkar-ba)
When the luck element is black
(klung-rta nag-pa)
the outcome for the luck aspect is as
follows (klung-'bras)
The victory banner of meritorious past actions will
the outcome for the luck aspect is as
follows (klung-'bras)
One's past merits will be stolen by demons, even
though one thinks one will not be cremated, buried
collapse, the sun and moon will set in the heavens,
and one's past merits will be exhausted, while one
at sea, or interred underground.
will have no opportunity to gather subsequent merits,
and bad reputation will flare, so that one will
die involuntarily.
The fifth and sixth analyses respectively concern whether the circumstances of the trigrams and numeric squares suggest an untimely
death or not. The former, depicted on Supplementary Plate 19, fig. 3, indicates that death is timely when the subject's year-sign corre-
sponds to a trigram in an enemy-relationship to the trigram governing the present year, whereas it is untimely when the subject's year-
sign is in an identity-relationship to the trigram governing the present year. For example, when the trigram of the present year is Li,
death will be timely during the iron bird or monkey year, and untimely during the fire horse year. As to the latter, which is depicted
on Supplementary Plate 19, fig. 4, death is considered timely when the four minor obstacle numeric squares33 are present alongside
their respective Black Two numeric squares, since a majority of household members have the death-wish; but if these are absent death
will be untimely.



315
Divinations of death
སྟགནག་པ།
དཀར་བ།
སྲེག་
སྲོག་འབྲས།
འབྲས།
བུས་ནག་པ།
བུས་
དཀར་བ།
5%BRcgda
་་*
ལས་འབྲས་
ལུས་
འབྲས་
དགུང་ཐུ༨ཞག་པ།
དབང་ཐུང་
དོར་བ།
དབང་འབྲས་
དབང་
འབྲས་
ཀླུང་རྟ་ནག་པ།
སྤུང་རྟ་
དུན།ར་བ།
ཨུ༨༠
ཀྲུང་༢བྲས་
འབྲེས་
NA
Plate 11, fig. 6
Lastly, the seventh analysis concerns the year-signs, and is depicted on Supplementary Plate 19, fig. 5. Death is considered to be timely
when one of the seven harsh aspects – such as the subject's own obstacle year – is present, or its seventh-removed year-sign (bdun-zur),
one of its three compatible signs (mthun-sum), or a fourth-removed adversarial year-sign (bzhi-gshed), or else when the log-men is subject
to the 'cutting influence of demons' or “roaming of the life-spirit, while the multiple of nine and the tomb-sign are both present, and there
are obstacles associated with the year, month, day and hour. Otherwise, if these conditions are absent, death will be considered untimely.
Khong
Dva
Khen
Kham
Gin
Zin
Zon
Plate 19, fig. 3 (Ms II: ff. 16–18): Calculations concerning timely and untimely death based on the trigrams (White Beryl, f. 352a)
Calculations concerning timely and untimely death based on the trigrams (spar-kha'i 'chi-dus brtsi-ba)
If the current trigram is the following (bab-spar)
death will be timely during the following years, which have
bird or monkey
their trigram in an enemy-relationship (dgra-spar lo)
and death will be untimely during the following years, which have
horse
their trigram in an identity-relationship (rang-spar lo)
mouse or pig
tiger or hare
mouse or pig
horse or snake
mouse or pig
ox, sheep, dog or dragon
mouse or pig
sheep
bird or monkey
dog
mouse or pig
OX
tiger or hare
dragon
Plate 19, fig. 3
ཡར་ཁའི་འཚ་དུས་oམི་རིས་
དཁྱ་སར་མ།



316
The White Beryl
Branimisho
Sareggradwristanta ausigaraan
dolgirisscascar
Plate 19, fig. 4
Plate 19, fig. 4 (Ms II: ff. 16–17): Calculations concerning timely and untimely death based on the numeric squares (White Beryl, f. 352a)
Calculations concerning timely and untimely death based on the numeric squares
(rme-ba'i 'chi-dus rtsi-ba)
Death is timely when the four minor obstacle numeric squares are present alongside their respective Black Two numeric squares, since a
majority of household members have the death-wish (skeg-phran bzhi-po so-so'i gnyis-nag bza'-tshang re-'dod mang-ba).
ལ་གྱིས་འཆི་དུསbཨ་
Siracasaegsratga ajragossobarasgrenzrecacate
བདུད་བགད་བྱ་འཕྱིས་ igravou racontar contigo
Plate 19, fig. 5
Plate 19, fig.5 (Ms II: ff. 17–18): Calculations concerning timely and untimely death based on the year-cycle (White Beryl, f. 352a/b)
Calculations concerning timely and untimely death based on the year-cycle
(lo-'gros 'chi-dus rtsi-ba)
Death is timely during one of the seven harsh aspects including the subject's own obstacle year, or its bdun-zur, mthun-sum and bzhi-gshed
aspects, when the star of the year-sign (lo-skan) S4 is present, the log-men is subject to the cutting influence of demons or roaming of the
life-spirit, while the multiple of nine and tomb-signs are both present, and there are obstacles associated with the year, month, day and hour
(rang-keg bdun-zur mthun-gsum bzhi-gshed rtsub-bdun lo-skar log-men bdud-gcod bla-'khyams dgu-mig dur-mig lo-zla zhag-dus-kyi keg).
When the final predictions are made, after tallying all those pebbles which determine timely and untimely death (Supplementary Plate
19, fig. 6), if the majority are black, the prediction is one of timely death. Earth will be consumed by water and wood by fire. Nothing will
help even if hundreds and thousands of doctors or Bon priests are present, and the living should not grieve because the lifespan is
exhausted. However, if the majority are white, death is considered untimely. The sun and moon will set in the heavens, the flowers of the
earth will be blighted by frost, a large tree will be axed by demons, and the subject will be carried off suddenly by demons, even though
death is unwarranted.
ཉིས་ཞག་མངཚད་ཕྲ༥g
ཏིལ་དཀར་ཡ་ཀོ་བུས་བྱt
།
11
-
NE
NU
VOISI
CE
ILACA
VOIMA
A
VILA
UVEA
CSIC
VA
2 .
-
A
AN
1
Plate 19, fig. 6
Plate 19, fig. 6 (Ms II: ff. 16–18): Predictions based on the tally of the pebbles (White Beryl, f. 352b)
The following is the predicted result when a majority of these pebbles are black (rdel-nag mang-tshogs 'bras-bu)
Earth will be consumed by water and wood by fire. Nothing will help even if hundreds and thousands of doctors or Bon priests are present,
and the living should not grieve because the lifespan is exhausted.
The following is the predicted result when a majority of these pebbles are white (rdel-dkar mang-tshogs 'bras-bu)
The sun and moon will set in the heavens, the flowers of the earth will be blighted by frost, a large tree will be axed by demons,
and the subject will be carried off suddenly by demons, even though death is unwarranted.
2. Predictions concerning faults and retributions
(snyad-dang le-lar, White Beryl, ff. 353a-354a)
In this technique, altogether fifty-eight pebbles are deployed, including forty-seven pebbles of symbolic recognition and eleven pebbles
representing the outcomes of faults (snyad) and consequent retributions (le-lan). Among them, the former, which are invariably cast as
white, are placed to mark the years, trigrams and numeric squares associated with hostile forces and ill-health, which have an impact
upon the vitality, body, destiny and luck aspects. The latter, meanwhile, represent the eleven retributions associated with the eight tri-
grams, which concern disease, demons, cattle, diet, clothing, guests, transport, direction, wealth, curses and harmful influence. These
eleven pebbles are designated as black if faults and retributions are present and as white if they are absent, as in exemplary chart 9.3,
derived from Bai-dkar bu-yig gshin-rtsis khra-ma'i dper-brjod gnad-bsdus. 35



317
Divinations of death
9.3 Exemplary chart
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī, for whom this second topic is the sixth category, specifically refers to the retributions associated with the inner tri-
grams in the following verses (Moonbeams, f. 36a/b):
Eleven pebbles indicative of retribution
(le-lan rdel bcu-gcig)
Disease (nad)
The sixth category concerns faults and retributions. 36
This refers to the various aspects of the trigrams,
Representing the eight diseases, the eight demons, the eight types of cattle,
Demons ('dre)
Cattle (phyugs)
Diet (zas)
Clothing (gos)
Guests (mgron)
Transport ('gru)
Direction (phyogs)
Wealth (non)
Curses (rbod-gtong)
Harmful influences (kha-dman)
The eight types of food, the eight types of clothing,
The eight types of wealth, the eight guests, the eight modes of transport,
The eight directions, the eight harmful influences, and the eight ritual curses. 37
Eleven (basic) pebbles are then placed,
Black ones if retribution is encountered, and white ones if not.
0
0
0
The actual prognostications
In general, retributions are said to be of three kinds: those associated with the outer year cycle, those associated with the inner trigrams,
and those associated with the intermediate numeric squares. Among these, the first have eight aspects: those of the vitality, body, destiny
and luck elements, which are illustrated on Plate 11, fig. 7, along with those of the year, month, day and hour.
When the pebble of the vitality element is black, it portends that retributions will ensue because one has overen-
gaged in social activities and sworn an oath falsely, or accused an innocent person. When this pebble is white, however, it portends that
retributions will ensue because of the rites undertaken by paternal relatives. When the pebble of the body element is black, it portends
that retributions will ensue due to ill-omens, demonic possession and the squandering of wealth. When this pebble is white, however, it
portends that retributions will ensue because the hospitality of paternal relatives has been squandered. When the pebble of the destiny
element is black, it portends that prosperity and wealth will be lost, but when it is white, it portends that retributions will ensue owing to
the squandering of wealth by in-laws and siblings. When the pebble of the luck element is black, it portends that pollution will occur
owing to the wrath of Bon or Buddhist priests, or else that there will be defamation; but when this pebble is white, it portends that retri-
butions will be exacted on account of the butchering of red meat or red lungs, so that the deities and protectors are enraged.
རྗེལ་ཐཞི་ནག་པ།
Bu
21
CORONA
Hag'ROKO
རྡེལ་བཞི་དཀར་བ།
OBDO
wasgogga
23
SU
Plate 11, fig. 7
luck (symbolised by lotus)
Plate 11, fig. 7 (Ms l: ff. 48–50): Predictions concerning faults and retributions associated with the vitality, body, destiny and luck elements (snyad-dang le-lan-las srog-lus dbang-klung-gi 'bras-bu, White Beryl, f. 353a)
When the following four pebbles are black
vitality (symbolised by crossed vajra)
body (symbolised by wheel)
destiny (symbolised by svāstika)
(rdel-bzhi nag-pa)
the corresponding retributions are as follows
retributions will ensue because one has overengaged in
retributions will ensue due to ill-omens, demonic
prosperity and wealth will be lost.
(le-lan 'bras-bu)
social activities, falsely sworn a sacred oath and accused possession, and the squandering of wealth.
pollution will occur owing to the wrath of Bon or Buddhist priests,
or else that there will be defamation.
an innocent person (mna'-zos dkar-mi byas-pa).
vitality (symbolised by crossed vajra)
When the following four pebbles are white
body (symbolised by wheel)
destiny (symbolised by svāstika)
luck (symbolised by lotus)
(rdel-bzhi dkar-ba)
the corresponding retributions are as follows
(le-lan 'bras-bu)
retributions will ensue because of the rites undertaken
retributions will ensue because the hospitality of paternal
retributions will ensue owing to the squandering of wealth
retributions will be exacted on account of the butchering of red
by paternal relatives.
relatives has been squandered.
by in-laws and siblings.
meat or red lungs, so that the deities and protectors are enraged.
When these four pebbles are all black, there are also secondary causes for retribution, formed by the enemy-and identity-relationships of
the elements, as illustrated on Plate 11, fig. 8. For example, if death occurs when the element fire is inhibiting iron, it portends that retri-
butions will ensue due to sorrows in the south or north. If death occurs when the element water is inhibiting fire, it portends that retribu-
tions will ensue due to wine offered by a widow. If death occurs when the element wood is inhibiting earth, retributions will ensue due to



BA
EN
Above Detail of Plate 11, fig. 7 (see p. 317), showing faults and
retributions associated with the body element
the presence of a red hill in the east. If death occurs when the element earth is inhibiting water, it portends that retributions will ensue
due to anger in the south-west. If death occurs when the element iron is inhibiting wood, it portends that retributions will ensue owing to
the presence of bloodied water in the west and an over-boiling stove. If death occurs when the element fire coincides with fire, it portends
that retributions will ensue due to bloodshed and an over-boiling stove. If death occurs when the element wood coincides with wood, it
portends that retributions will ensue due to nocturnal travels in the north-west. If death occurs when the element water coincides with
water, it portends that retributions will ensue because the house will be blackened. If death occurs when the element iron coincides with
iron, it portends that retributions will ensue due to an oath taken while making a burnt offering. Lastly, if death occurs when the element
earth coincides with earth, it portends that retributions will ensue due to ploughing.
Plate 11, fig. 8
འབྱུང་ངགྲ་ནང།
།
2 rugiagret



319
Divinations of death
iron in identity with iron
earth in identity with earth
Plate 11, fig. 8 (Ms l: ff. 48–50): Predictions concerning faults and retributions: Secondary causes for retribution, formed by the enemy- and identity-relationships of the elements at the time of death (snyad-dang le-lan-las 'byung-ba dgra-nang gnyis-kyi rkyen; White Beryl, f. 353a)
When the elements iron inhibited by fire fire inhibited by water earth inhibited by wood water inhibited by earth wood inhibited by iron fire in identity with fire wood in identity with wood water in identity with water
have the following
enemy or identity-
relationships
(byung-dgra nang)
the corresponding
resulting retributions
are as follows
retributions will ensue due
retributions will ensue due
retributions will ensue due
retributions will ensue due
retributions will ensue owing retributions will ensue due
retributions will ensue due
retributions will ensue
retributions will ensue due
retributions will ensue due
to sorrows in the south
to wine which is offered
to the presence of a red
to anger in the south-west.
to nocturnal travels in
because the house will
to an oath taken while
to ploughing.
to the presence of bloodied
water in the west and an
to bloodshed and an
over-boiling stove.
or north.
by a widow.
hill in the east.
the north-west.
be blackened.
making a burnt offering.
(le-lan 'bras-bu)
over-boiling stove.
In addition there are the retributions due to the coincidence of certain years, months, days and hours, as indicated on Plate 11, fig. 9. For
example, if one dies under the tiger sign, the monkey month will be interrupted by demons, and one will be carried off by king spirits and
malign goblins (the'u-brang) to the east, and subsequently one will be ritually oppressed by posterity. If one dies under the hare sign,
interruptions will occur during the bird month, and retributions will ensue on account of buying an ox or owl for eating (za-'ug). 38 If one
dies under the dragon sign, interruptions will occur during the dog month, retributions will ensue due to wars, and one will be carried off
by demons of madness. If one dies under the snake sign, interruptions will occur during the pig month, and retributions will be encoun-
tered due to demons in the west. If one dies under the horse sign, interruptions will occur during the mouse month and retributions will
ensue due to blood feuds and punishments. If one dies under the sheep sign, interruptions will occur during the ox month, and one will be
carried off by upper demons (ya-bdud) and lower demons (ma-bdud). 99 If one dies under the monkey sign, interruptions will occur during
the tiger month, and retributions will ensue due to hostile foes and losses. If one dies under the bird sign, interruptions will occur during
the hare month, one will be carried off by king spirits, and retributions will ensue due to the contamination of the wealth of the monastic
community. If one dies under the dog sign, interruptions will occur during the dragon month, retributions will ensue due to bloodshed,
and one will be carried off by haunting spirits (btsan). If one dies under the pig sign, interruptions will occur during the snake month,
while demonic forces will arise in the west and north. If one dies under the mouse sign, interruptions will occur during the horse month,
and one will be carried off by haunting spirits (bstan) to the south-east. Lastly, if one dies under the ox sign, interruptions will occur dur-
ing the sheep month, and one will be carried off by demons summoned by Bon or Buddhist ritual daggers (kīla). These predictions are
said to emerge when the year, month, day and hour of death share a common sign, and particularly around the hour.
Araz agy A
བདུད་བཅད་ཟླ་བ། །
na ta'QgNAJ
Plate 11, fig. 9
dog
dog
pig
mouse
OX
Plate 11, fig. 9 (Ms l: ff. 48–50): Predictions concerning faults and retributions: Retributions due to the coincidence of certain years, months, days and hours (snyad-dang le-lan-las lo-zla zhag-dus-kyi le-lan, White Beryl, f. 353a/b)
If death coincides tiger
hare
dragon
snake
horse
sheep
monkey
bird
bird
with the following
years, months, days
or hours (shi-ba'i
lo-zla zhag-dus)
the following monkey
bird
dog
mouse
Ox
tiger
hare
dragon
snake
horse
sheep
corresponding
months will
be interrupted
by demons (bdud-
bcad zla-ba)
and the resulting
retributions will ensue
retributions will ensue
retributions will ensue
retributions will ensue
retributions will be due
demonic forces will
retributions will ensue
retributions will ensue
retributions will ensue
due to hostile foes
due to blood feuds and
as one is carried off
retributions will be
encountered due to
demons in the west.
due to the contamination to bloodshed, and one
arise in the west
as one is carried off by
secondary cause
of retribution will
be as follows
as one is carried off by
as one is carried of by
king spirits and malign
goblins (the 'u-brang)
retributions will
ensue on account of
buying an ox or owl
for eating (za-'ug).
retributions will ensue
due to wars, and one
will be carried off by
demons of madness.
punishments (zhal-Ice). by upper demons
and losses.
of the wealth of the
and north.
haunting spirits to
demons summoned by
will be carried off by
haunting spirits.
(ya-bdud) and lower
monastic community.
the south-east.
Bon or Buddhist ritual
(lan-rkyen
to the east, and ritually
demons (ma-bdud).
daggers (kila).
'bras-bu)
oppressed by posterity.
The retributions associated with the inner trigrams and the intermediate numeric squares both take effect if the admonitions made on the
basis of the aforementioned calculations of the living (gson-rtsis) have been neglected, as depicted on Supplementary Plate 19, figs 7–8.



320
The White Beryl
As to the former (fig. 7): when death coincides with the Li trigram, retributions occur on account of having bought a horse, turquoise, or a
felt hat, or having eaten the flesh or butchered head of a horse or wild ass, or after lighting an ordinary fire in a homa pit; while the cutting
influence of demons will be felt in the north-west. When death coincides with the Khon trigram, retributions occur on account of gems,
turquoise, and canvas tents (stod-gur), or after having eaten linseed powder or mutton slain by a wolf; while the cutting influence of sub-
terranean ogres (sa-srin) will be felt in the north. When death coincides with the Dva trigram, retributions occur on account of girdle
ornaments ('og-pag), goat-flesh which has been left rotting on the mountains after being carried off by wolves, or on account of a blood
feud; while the cutting influence of haunting spirits (btsan) is felt in the east. When death coincides with the Khen trigram, retributions
occur on account of having eaten disputed marmot flesh, or roasted barley flour (tsam-pa) mixed with blood; while the cutting influence of
demons, manifested in the form of a potter's daughter, will be felt in the south. When death coincides with the Kham trigram, retributions
occur on account of having eaten the tail or head of an ox, pig, bird or fish or on account of going to a cemetery; while the cutting influence
of hybrid serpentine and attachment spirits (klu-bsen)40 will be felt in the south-west. When death coincides with the Gin trigram, retribu-
tions occur on account of having eaten the shanks or cancerous flesh of a red ox; while the cutting influence of accursed demons (rbad-
'dre)41 will be felt in the south-east. When death coincides with the Zin trigram, retributions occur on account of having eaten chicken or
rabbit flesh in the home of a relative in the south-west or with a door facing south-west; while the cutting influence of king spirits (rgyal-
po) will be felt in the west. When death coincides with the Zon trigram, retributions occur on account of leprosy-causing spirits, the flesh
of hybrid cattle or oxen, crowds of people, and dust-storms; while the cutting influence of malevolent forces will be felt in the north-east.
wrences que
00
city
ke
Plate 19, fig. 7
Plate 19, fig. 7 (Ms II: ff. 16-18): Calculation of retributions associated with the trigrams (White Beryl, f. 353b)
Calculation of retributions associated with the trigrams (spar-kha'i le-lan rtsis)
When death coincides with Li
Khon
the following current trigram
Dva
Khen
Kham
Gin
Zin
Zon
retributions occur on account of
retributions occur on account of
retributions occur on account of
(bab-spar)
the consequent retributions
and cutting influence of
demons are as follows
(lan-rkyen bdud-gcod)
retributions occur on account of
having bought a horse, turquoise,
or a felt hat, or of having eaten
retributions occur on account of
gems, turquoises, canvas tents
(stod-gur), or on account of having
retributions occur on account of
having eaten the tail or head of an
having eaten chicken or rabbit
flesh at the residence of a relative
leprosy-causing spirits, the flesh
of hybrid cattle or oxen, crowds
the flesh or butchered head of a
retributions occur on account of
girdle ornaments ('og-pag),
goat-meat which has been left
rotting on the mountains after
being carried off by wolves, or on
account of a blood feud; while
the cutting influence of haunting
eaten linseed powder or mutton
retributions occur on account of
having eaten disputed marmot
flesh,or roasted barley flour mixed
with blood; while the cutting
influence of demons, manifested
in the form of a potter's daughter,
will be felt in the south.
having eaten the shanks or
cancerous flesh of a red ox; while
the cutting influence of accursed
demons (rbad-'dre) will be
ox, pig, bird or fish; or of going to
a cemetery; while the cutting
influence of hybrid serpentine and
attachment spirits will be felt
in the south-west or which has
horse or wild ass, or after lighting
slain by a wolf; while the cutting
a door facing the south-west;
of people, and dust-storms; while
the cutting influence of malevolent
forces will be felt in the north-east.
influence of subterranean ogres
felt in the south-east.
while the cutting influence of king
an ordinary fire in a homa pit;
while the cutting influence of
malevolent forces will be felt in
will be felt in the north.
in the south-west.
spirits will be felt in the west.
spirits is felt in the east.
the north-west.
The retributions associated with the numeric squares are depicted on Supplementary Plate 19, fig. 8. When death coincides with
White One, retribution occurs on account of having accepted food from a widowed person. When it coincides with Black Two, retribu-
tion occurs on account of having travelled at night. When it coincides with Blue Three, retribution occurs on account of being struck
by zor missiles. When it coincides with Green Four, retribution occurs on account of ploughing furrows. When it coincides with
Yellow Five, retribution occurs on account of sour foods or exhausted wealth. When it coincides with White Six, retribution occurs
on account of pollution, offerings not being made, or a dur-bon priest marrying. When it coincides with Red Seven, retribution occurs
on account of overcooking or red meat. When it coincides with White Eight, retribution occurs on account of squandering the wealth
of the Bon or Buddhist communities. Lastly, when it coincides with Red Nine, retribution occurs on account of a diminution in prosper-
ity and luck.



321
Divinations of death
Braiñinsgresstegt
aas
Pasi
ago
Plate 19, fig. 8
Plate 19, fig. 8 (Ms Il: ff. 16–18): Recognition of retributions associated with the numeric squares (White Beryl, f. 353b-354a)
Recognition of retributions associated with the numeric squares (rme-ba'i le-lan ngos-'dzin)
When death coincides with White 1
Black 2
Blue 3
the following current numeric
Green 4
Yellow 5
White 6
Red 7
White 8
Red 9
square (bab-rme)
the following material objects retribution occurs on account
retribution occurs on account
retribution occurs on account
retribution occurs on account
retribution occurs on account
retribution occurs on account
retribution occurs on account
retribution occurs on account
retribution occurs on account
of having travelled at night.
of being struck by zor missiles.
of ploughing furrows.
of sour foods or exhausted
of pollution, offerings not being
of overcooking or red meat.
of squandering the wealth of
of a diminution in prosperity
are indicative of retribution
(lo-lan-gyis rdzas)
of having accepted food from
a widowed person
wealth
made, and a Bon funerary
the Bon or Buddhist
and luck.
priest (dur-bon) marrying.
communities.
3. Predictions concerning demonic influences
('dre-gdon sus khyer-ba; White Beryl, ff. 354a-361a)
The third mode of inspection concerns demonic influences ('dre-gdon). Seven basic divinatory pebbles are employed, representing the
year, trigram, numeric square, day, planet, constellation and hour of decease at which concomitant demonic possession may occur.
Exemplary chart 9.4 is derived from Bai-dkar bu-yig gshin-rtsis khra-ma'i dper-brjod gnad-bsdus.42 The pebbles are cast after contrasting
the circumstances of death with those of a subject running the risk of demonic possession. The reading suggests a sliding scale of posi-
tive-negative prognoses, corresponding respectively to the mother-, friend-, son-, identity, and enemy-relationships.
9.4 Exemplary chart
Death inducing demonic possession ('dres khyer)
Deceased's year-sign
Current trigram
Current numeric square
Day
Planet
Constellation
Hour
First, concerning the demonic influences associated with the years, which are illustrated on Plate 11, fig. 10: when one born in a mouse
year dies, the devouring spirits (za-'dre) will come stealthily and carry off those with a dragon or horse sign, while four married relatives
will depart on a demonic blue horse. When one born in an ox year dies, the avenging spirits will infiltrate the subject's maternal line, and
carry off those with a snake or sheep sign, while five married relatives will have a demonic ox, a tawny dog and yellow cattle, and the
devouring spirits (za-'dre) will be present in offering sacraments. When one born in a tiger year dies, the demons will infiltrate female
relatives, or male relatives if the subject is female, and carry off those with an ox or bird sign, while the avenging spirits will be present in
the cooking plates. When one born in a hare year dies, a group of three avenging spirits will carry off those with a tiger sign. When one
born in a dragon year dies, the demons will carry off those with a monkey or dog sign, while the avenging spirits will be concealed in a
turquoise stone or a hybrid cow. When one born in a snake year dies, those with a bird or pig sign will be carried off, while the devouring
spirits will be concealed within red, blue or black substances wrapped in wool or fur, or else within gemstones. When one born in a horse
year dies, the demons will carry off those with a mouse or hare sign, and the devouring spirits will be present in the cooking plates. When
one born in a sheep year dies, those with an ox or sheep sign will be carried off, and the devouring spirits will be present in wool, leather,
or food that is green in colour. When one born in a monkey year dies, those with a tiger or pig sign will be carried off, the avengers will
ingress, and the devouring spirits will be concealed in the cooking plate. When one born in a bird year dies, those with a hare or ox sign
will be carried off, and the devouring spirits will be present in leather or wool. When one born in a dog year dies, those with a dragon, ox
or sheep sign will be carried off, and the devouring spirits will infiltrate Bon or Buddhist practitioners, as well as five married relatives



322
The White Beryl
and five siblings whose names end in -dpal, -brtsegs-pa, -lug and -mgon. Lastly, when one born in a pig year dies, those with a pig or hare
sign will be carried off, and the avenging spirits will be concealed in iron fragments, and so forth. In all such cases rituals are prescribed
for the slaying of the avengers (gshed-ma) by Bon or Buddhist practitioners, and for the warding off of the devouring spirits.
Plate 11, fig. 10
Plate 11, fig. 10 (Ms 1: ff. 48–50): Predictions concerning demonic influences ('dre-gdon sus khyer-ba) associated with the deceased's year-sign (White Beryl, ff. 354a-355a)
When the
mouse
OX
tiger
hare
dragon
snake
horse
sheep
monkey
bird
dog
deceased's year-
sign is the following
(gshin-pa'llo)
the following will
be carried off by
the devouring spirits
(za-'dre) will come
the avenging spirits will the demons will inflitrate
infiltrate the subject's female relatives, or male
a group of three
avenging spirits will
the demons will carry
off those with a monkey
or dog sign, while the
those with a bird or pig
sign will be carried off,
while the devouring
the demons will carry
off those with a mouse
or hare sign, and the
those with an ox
or sheep sign will be
those with a tiger or pig those with a hare or ox those with a dragon,
sign will be carried off, sign will be carried off, ox or sheep sign will be
the avengers will ingress, and the devouring spirits carried off, and the
those with a pig or
hare sign will be carried
off, and the avenging
demons, who
stealthily and carry off
maternal line, and carry
relatives if the subject
carry off those with
carried off, and the
a tiger sign.
avenging spirits will be
spirits will be concealed
devouring spirits will
devouring spirits will
and the devouring spirits will be present in
devouring spirits will
spirits will be concealed
concealed in a turquoise
be present in wool,
leather or wool.
infiltrate Bon or
in iron fragments.
infiltrate in the those with a dragon or
following directions horse sign, while four
('dres 'khrid-dang married relatives will
'gro-sa)
depart on a demonic
blue horse.
off those with a snake is female, and carry
or sheep sign, while five off those with an ox or
married relatives will bird sign, while the
have an ox, a tawny dog, avenging spirits will
within red, blue or black be present in
substances wrapped the cooking plates.
will be concealed in
the cooking plates.
stone or a hybrid cow.
leather, or food which
Buddhist practitioners,
in wool or fur, or else
is green in colour.
as well as five married
within gemstones.
relatives and five siblings
and yellow cattle; and
the devouring spirits
be present in the
cooking plates.
whose names end in
will be present in
-dpal, -brtsegs-pa,-lug
offering sacraments.
and -mgon.
Second, concerning the demonic influences associated with the trigrams, which are illustrated on Plate 12, fig. 2: when one dies under the
trigram Li, the haunting spirits will carry off those who are susceptible. When one dies under the trigram Khon, the spirit lords of the soil
will do so, as will the hybrid haunting and king spirits (btsan-rgyal) when one dies under the trigram Dva, the king spirits (rgyal-po) when
one dies under the trigram Khen, the hybrid serpentine and haunting spirits (klu-btsan) and lake-dwelling mermaids (mtsho-sman) when
one dies under the trigram Kham, Pe-har rGyal-po when one dies under the trigram Gin, the hybrid serpentine spirits and ogres (klu-
srin) and the haunting spirits (btsan) when one dies under the trigram Zin, and the male king spirits (rgyal-po pho-'dre) when one dies
under the trigram Zon.
གཤིས་ཀྱི་བབ་སྤུ༣
ཁྱེར་འདྲེ།
Plate 12, fig. 2
Plate 12, fig. 2 (Msi: ff. 51-53): Predictions concerning demonic influences ('dre-gdon sus khyer-ba) associated with the deceased's trigram (White Beryl, ff. 354a-361a)
Li
Khon
Dva
Khen
Kham
Gin
Zin
Zon
When the deceased's current
trigram is the following
(gshin-gyi babs-spar)
the following demons will
carry off [the living] relatives
haunting spirits
spirit lords of the soil
hybrid haunting and king
king spirits
Pe-har rGyal-po
hybrid serpentine spirits and
male king spirits
spirits (btsan-rgya)
hybrid serpentine and haunting
spirits (klu-btsan) and lake-
dwelling mermaids (mtsho-sman)
ogres, and haunting spirits
(rgyal-po pho-'dre)
(khyer-'dre)
Diverse outcomes are also implied when death coincides with one of the above trigrams, as illustrated on Plate 12, fig. 4. For example,
when one dies under Li, the avenging spirits (gshed-ma) infiltrate aristocrats, Bon priests and disabled persons, or red dogs. When one
dies under Khon, the avenging spirits infiltrate five married relatives and red dogs. When one dies under Dva, the devouring spirits (za-
'dre) will infiltrate young children and mounds shaped like a frog. When one dies under the trigram Khen, the devouring spirits will



323
Divinations of death
infiltrate old people or red dogs and red cattle in the north-west. When one dies under Kham, the devouring spirits are said to infiltrate
copper pots, brass water pots and alcohol, which is inauspicious for servants if they remain for thirteen days, and also young children.
When one dies under Gin, the devouring spirits infiltrate blue-black horses or cattle, which is inauspicious for older children and women
if they remain for ten days, and they are said to move in the direction of black oxen. When one dies under Zin, the devouring spirits
infiltrate hides and skin, for which reason they are said to be inauspicious for pregnant relatives. When one dies under Zon, the devouring
spirits infiltrate silk garments, goat flesh and sheep's hide. If they remain there for twenty-six days, they are inauspicious for elderly
paternal relatives and pregnant women, or else they infiltrate Buddhists, Bon priests and the nobility, as well as pregnant neighbours
with matted hair who are eating and who possess piebald horses or cattle.
Plate 12, fig. 4 (Ms I. ff. 51–53): Predictions concerning demonic influences ('dre-gdon sus khyer-ba) associated with the trigrams when coinciding with death (White Beryl, ff. 354a-361a)
Khon
Dva
Khen
Kham
Gin
Zin
Zon
Trigram form
(spar-kha'i gzugs)
Predicted result
('bras-bu)
the devouring spirits will infiltrate
the avenging spirits (gshed-ma)
will infiltrate aristocrats, Bon priests
and disabled persons, or red dogs.
the avenging spirits will infiltrate
five married relatives and red dogs.
the devouring spirits will infiltrate
young children and mounds
old people or red dogs and red
cattle in the north-west.
the devouring spirits will infiltrate
copper pots, brass water pots
and alcohol, which is inauspicious
for servants if they remain for
thirteen days, and also young
the devouring spirits will infiltrate
hides and skin, for which reason
they are said to be inauspicious for
pregnant relatives.
the devouring spirits infiltrate silk
garments, goat flesh and sheep's
hide, and if they remain there for
shaped like a frog.
the devouring spirits will infiltrate
blue-black horses or cattle, which
is inauspicious for older children
and women if they remain for ten
days, and they are said to move in
the direction of black oxen.
twenty-six days they are inauspicious
for elderly paternal relatives and
children.
pregnant women, or else they will
infiltrate Buddhists, Bon priests and
the nobility, as well as pregnant
neighbours with matted hair, who are
eating and possess piebald horses or cattle.
Nimamay
འབྲས་
Plate 12, fig. 4
Third, concerning the demonic influences associated with the numeric squares, which are illustrated on Plate 12, fig. 3: if one dies under
the numeric square White One, the gods (deva) may afflict young children. If one dies under Black Two, malevolent forces (bdud) may
afflict women.49 If one dies under Blue Three, attachment spirits (bsen) emerging from the tombs of auspicious corpses (bkra) may cause
affliction and death in the night. If one dies under Green Four, serpentine spirits (klu) may cause affliction, infiltrating the wife's family
line. If one dies under Yellow Five, the spirit lords of the soil (sa-bdag) or devouring spirits (za-'dre) may cast afflictions upon senior
paternal relatives. If one dies under White Six, king spirits (rgyal-po) or hybrid gods and haunting spirits (lha-btsan) may provoke
afflictions due to sudden stroke. If one dies under Red Seven, the devouring spirits (za-'dre) or haunting spirils (btsan) may interrupt the
familial descent. If one dies under White Eight, the devouring spirits (za-'dre) or countryside deities (yul-lha) may infiltrate the vital
foods that resemble the heart of the paternal relatives, giving them to a beggar; and if one dies under Red Nine, the devouring spirits may
infiltrate red-coloured property, causing losses to cattle and sheep.
Plate 12, fig. 3 (Ms I:ff. 51–53): Predictions concerning demonic influences ('dre-gdon sus khyer-ba) associated with the deceased's numeric square (White Beryl, ff. 354a-361a)
When the deceased's
White 1
Black 2
Blue 3
Green 4
Yellow 5
White 6
Red 7
White 8
Red 9
current numeric square
is the following (gshin-gyi
babs-sme)
malevolent forces may
the devouring spirits (za-'dre)
the devouring spirits or country
the devouring spirits may
the following demons
will carry off [the living]
(khyer-'dre)
gods (deva) may afflict
young children.
attachment spirits (bsen)
emerging from the tombs of
serpentine spirits (klu) may
cause affliction, infiltrating the
afflict women.
the spirit lords of the soil
(sa-bdag or devouring spirits
(za-'dre) may cast affliction
king spirits (rgyal-po) or hybrid
gods and haunting spirits
(ha-btsan) may provoke
or haunting spirits (btsan) may
spirits (yul-Iha) may infiltrate
inflitrate red-coloured property,
auspicious ancestral' corpses
wife's family line.
interrupt the familial descent.
the vital foods that resemble
causing losses to cattle
(bkra) may cause affliction and
upon senior paternal relatives.
afflictions due to sudden stroke.
the heart of the paternal
and sheep.
death in the night
relatives, giving them to a beggar.
ཤིན་གྱི་བག་
Plate 12, fig. 3



324
The White Beryl
Similar predictions are given in respect of death coinciding with the different types of demonic possession associated with the days, plan-
ets, constellations and hours, as expounded in White Beryl, ff. 357a-361a. Among these, the first are depicted on Supplementary Plate 19,
fig. 9. For example, if death coincides with the ox day, an adjacent month will be inauspicious and potentially fatal. If it coincides with the
tiger day, the bird month will be inauspicious; and similarly, if it coincides with the snake day, the monkey month will be inauspicious, as
will the bird month if death coincides with the horse day, the sheep month if it coincides with the sheep day, and the dog month if it coin-
cides with the monkey day.
ཉི་མའི་ཁྱེར་ཏེ་སྲོག་ བརྩད་ཀྱི་ལོ་ན་
དེ་ནི་
ཞ་ས་དང་སྲོག
obracay
ཉེ་བར་ངན་
Plate 19, fig. 9
OX
horse
sheep
monkey
Plate 19, fig. 9 (Ms II, ff. 16-18): Potentially fatal retributions due to evil spirits borne by the day [of death] (White Beryl, f. 357a)
Potentially fatal retributions due to evil spirits borne by the day (of death] (nyi-ma'i khyer 'dre srog-bcad-kyi le-lan)
If death coincides with the following
tiger
snake
days (shi-nyi)
the following months are inauspicious or an adjacent month will
bird
monkey
potentially fatal (ngan-pa-dang
be inauspicious for
srog-bcad zla-ba)
relatives (nye-bar ngan)
bird
sheep
dog
In all such cases, the modes of attachment to which bereaved relative succumb, as well as the type of relative who is most susceptible, are
mentioned, along with the appropriate counteracting ritual activities.
4. Predictions concerning appropriate funeral status
('dur-thang, White Beryl, ff. 361a-362b)
Corresponding to the fortune of the deceased, there are eighteen appropriate modes of funeral status, which are all illustrated on Plate 12,
fig. 5.44 These comprise: the six greater modes of funeral status ('dur-thang che-drug), the six lesser modes of funeral status ('dur-thang
chung-drug) and the six irregular modes of funeral status ('dur-thang 'chol-ba drug).
Among the six greater modes, the first is the appropriate status of funeral for spiritual friends (yid-tshang dge-
shes), whose mortal remains should be cremated on a throne and inserted within a reliquary stūpa. The ceremony should correspond to
one or other of the Buddhist traditions, hundreds of butter lamps should be offered, and hundreds of feast-offering ceremonies should be
held, along with scriptural recitations and musical offerings, while gold, turquoise and other precious gemstones should be offered along
with divine offering cakes. In this way, the deceased's doctrinal lineage will flourish. The second is the appropriate funeral status for
kings or potentates (za-'og yid-'dur), according to which all the wealth of gold, turquoise, silver and other precious gems which were
amassed in life should be offered up. A silken brocade tent of five colours should be bedecked with tiger-skins and gemstones, and food
should be offered seven or nine times. The third is the appropriate funeral status for wise ministers (mdzangs-pa'i phrul-'dur), according to
which food should be offered to all the deceased's paternal relatives, temples should be refurbished, and offerings representative of bud-
dha-body and speech should be made. The assembled relatives should erect four silk-draped reliquaries, and offer food seven times. The
fourth is the appropriate funeral status for rich men (phyug-po'i phrod-'dur), according to which the property of the deceased and food
should be offered on eleven occasions. The fifth is the appropriate funeral status for valiant soldiers (dpa'-bo'i stag-'dur), according to
which the spoils of war amassed by the deceased should be offered, along with armour, tiger-and leopard-skin maces, swords and spears,
and food should be offered five times. The sixth is the appropriate funeral status for males who have many sons (skyes-pa'i pho-'dur),
according to which each son should make an individual offering, and food should be offered seven times by each son.
Among the six lesser modes of funeral status, the first is the appropriate status for herders (rdzi'u lugs-shid),
according to which the wealth maintained by the paternal relatives in life should be kept undivided at death, while all the relatives should
perform the funeral rites in person. The second is the appropriate funeral status for wives who have no sons (za-ma'i mo-'dur), according
to which women should act as intermediaries and daughters should make the food-offerings. The third is the appropriate funeral status
for single persons in their twenties who are without family or relatives (bral-ba'i bya-shid), according to which the mortal remains should
be carried elsewhere for burial, while the food, gold, turquoise and utensils of the deceased should be immersed in a solution of cayenne
pepper (gYer-ma). The fourth is the appropriate funeral status for unfortunate wretched women who have daughters but no husband
('bang-mo'i byur-shid), according to which the corpse should be carried to a remote crevice where it cannot be seen and ritual purification
should be undertaken. The fifth is the appropriate funeral status for children under the age of fourteen (sman-ni bu-chung shid), according
to which the corpse should be concealed at home and not placed in the cemetery. The sixth is the appropriate funeral status for paupers or
servants (bse-rags byur-shid), according to which, if there is no funeral attendant, the ceremonies should be conducted by a monk or a nun,
and the corpse should not be kept upstairs in the house.
Among the six irregular modes of funeral status, the first is appropriate for kings who are buried as commoners
(rgyal-po dmangs-'dur), according to which the living refuse to grant a funeral fitting the deceased's status. Even the price of wine has to be
borrowed, and people are embarrassed to partake of the offerings. The second is the appropriate funeral status for a king whose family line
has come to an end (rabs-chad rgyal-shid), according to which each of the king's siblings should make a food-offering. The third is the appro-
priate funeral status for children aged fourteen or fifteen who die accidentally due to possession by the ghosts of female murder victims and
lake-dwelling mermaids (gre-mo sman-du 'dur), according to which the corpse possessed by the ghost should be exorcised and carried off to



325
Divinations of death
a ravine at the extremity of the grassland, and there disposed. The fourth is the appropriate funeral status for the corpses of the aged which
are disposed of in the manner of infant corpses (bkra-rgan sri'ur-'dur), according to which if the deceased is wealthy and without descen-
dants the corpses should be embalmed and carried off for entombment. The fifth is the appropriate funeral status for those of great merit
for whom normal funerals are unsuitable (bsod-nams che-yang mi-rung), namely Buddhist monks who die in a doctrinal assembly, mantrins
who die while in retreat, and Bon priests who die among their gods, in which cases funerals should not be undertaken since their deaths
have coincided with the natural state of being. The sixth is the appropriate funeral status for those of great destiny who have died of lep-
rosy (dbang-thang che-yang mi-rung), according to which no tomb can be prepared even though the deceased may have amassed much
wealth and have sons. Instead the leprous corpse should be sewn in a horse-hide or ox-hide, and cast into a river for disposal.
Plate 12, fig. 5 (Ms I:ff. 51–53): Predictions concerning appropriate funeral status ('dur-thang; White Beryl, ff. 361a-362b)
Social status of the spiritual friends
kings or potentates
wise ministers
deceased (mi-rigs) (vid-tshang dge-shes-kyi dur (za-'ng yid-'dur)
(mdzangs-pa'i phrul-'dur)
rich men
valiant soldiers
males who have many sons
herders
wives who have no sons
single persons in their twenties
(phyug-po'i phrod-'dur)
(dpa'-bo'i stag-'dur)
(skyes-pa'i pho-'dur)
(rdzi'u lugs-shid)
(za-ma'i mo-'dur)
who are without family or
relatives (bral-ba'i bya-shid)
the mortal remains should be
all the wealth of gold, turquoise,
food should be offered to all the
the property of the deceased
the spoils of war amassed by
each son should make an
the wealth maintained by the
women should act as
the mortal remains should
Appropriate funeral
status ('dur-thang)
cremated on a throne, and
silver and other precious gems
deceased's paternal relatives,
and food should be offered on
the deceased should be
individual offering, and food
paternal relatives in life should
intermediaries and daughters
be carried elsewhere for burial,
inserted within a reliquary
which were amassed in life
temples should be refurbished,
eleven occasions.
offered, along with armour,
should be offered seven
be kept undivided at death,
should make the food-offerings.
while the food, gold, turquoise
stūpa. The ceremony should
should be offered up. A silken
tiger- and leopard-skin maces,
times by each son.
while all the relatives should
and utensils of the deceased
correspond to one or other of the brocade tent of five colours
perform the funeral
should be immersed in a
and offerings representative of
buddha-body and speech
should be made. The assembled
relatives should erect four
swords and spears, and food
should be offered five times.
rites in person.
solution of cayenne pepper.
Buddhist traditions, hundreds of should be bedecked with tiger-
butter lamps should be offered, skins and gemstones, and food
and hundreds of feast-offering
should be offered seven or
silk-draped reliquaries, and
ceremonies should be held,
nine times.
offer food seven times.
along with scriptural recitations
and musical offerings, while gold,
turquoise and other precious
gemstones should be offered
along with divine offering cakes.
paupers or servants
kings who are buried as
kings whose family line has
those of great merit for whom
Social status of the
deceased (mi-rigs)
unfortunate wretched women
who have daughters but no
children under the age of
fourteen (sman-
children aged fourteen or
fifteen who die accidentally
an aged auspicious corpse,
which is disposed of in the
those of great destiny who
have died of leprosy
(bse-rags byur-shid)
commoners
come to an end
normal funerals are unsuitable
husband ('bang-mo'i byur-shid
ni bu-chung shid)
(rgyal-po dmangs-'dur)
(rabs-chad rgyal-shid)
due to possession by
manner of an infant corpse
(bsod-nams che-yang mi-rung),
(dbang-thang che-yang
the ghosts of female
(bkra-rgan sri'ur-'dur)
namely monks who die in a
mi-rung)
murder victims and
doctrinal assembly, mantrins
lake-dwelling mermaids
who die while in retreat, and
Bon-pos who die among their gods
funerals should not be
no tomb can be prepared even
Appropriate funeral
the corpse should be carried to
the corpse should be concealed
if there is no funeral attendant,
the living refuse to grant a
funeral fitting the deceased's
each of the king's siblings
should make a food-offering.
status ('dur-thang)
a remote crevice where it
at home and not placed in
the ceremonies should be
(gre-mo sman-du 'dur)
the corpse possessed by the corpse should be
the ghost of a female murder embalmed (sman-thabs)
victim should be exorcised and and carried off
carried off to a ravine at the for entombment.
undertaken since their deaths
though the deceased may have
cannot be seen and ritual
the cemetery
conducted by a monk or a nun,
status. Even the price of wine
have coincided with the natural
amassed much wealth and have
purification should
and the corpse should not be
has to be borrowed, and people
state of being.
sons. Instead the leprous corpse
be undertaken.
kept upstairs in the house.
are embarrassed to partake
extremity of the grassland,
should be sewn in a horse-hide
of the offerings.
and there disposed.
or ox-hide, and cast into a
river for disposal.
མ་རགས།
འདུར་ཐང༌།
མི་རིགས།
tes
འདུར་ཐང།
Plate 12, fig. 5



326
The White Beryl
Opposite Detail of Plate 19, fig. 10, showing predictions of rebirth in
the animal, tormented spirit and hell realms
There is also another enumeration of thirteen modes of funeral ceremony ('dur-lugs bcu-gsum). Among them, the so-called 'funeral of
earth by heaven' (gnam-gyis sa-'dur) refers to funeral of a subject undertaken by a king, while the funeral of heaven by earth' (sa-yis gnam
'dur) is the opposite. The ‘funeral of shade by sunlight (gdags-kyis sribs-'dur) refers to the funeral of a wife undertaken by a husband, while
the ‘funeral of sunlight by shade' (sribs-kyis gdags-'dur) is the opposite. The 'funeral of left by righť (gYas-kyis gYon-'dur) refers to the
funeral of a maternal uncle undertaken by a nephew, while the ‘funeral of right by left (gYon-gyis gras-'dur) suggests the opposite. The
‘funeral of body by head' (mgo-bos lus-'dur) refers to the funeral of a son undertaken by a father, while the ‘funeral of head by body'(lus-kyis
mgo-'dur) suggests the opposite. The 'funeral of lowland by upland’ (phu-yis mda'-'dur) refers to the funeral of a student undertaken by a
teacher, while the 'funeral of upland by lowland' (mda'-yis phu-'dur) suggests the opposite.
5. Predictions concerning realms of subsequent rebirth
(phyi-ma'i skye-gnas, White Beryl, ff. 362b-364a)
The realm of subsequent rebirth may also be determined through this divination technique. The six realms of existence or rebirth are
subsumed within the celestial god realms (devaloka), presided over by Devendra and his retinue, forming the Trāyatrimśa, who partake of
the world-system of desire (kāmadhātu) and the world-system of form (rūpadhātu); the subterranean abodes of the hells and so forth,
presided over by Yama Dharmarāja and his retinue, who partake of the three lower existences; and the intermediate or terrestrial abodes
of human beings and indeterminate beings, who linger in the intermediate state between death and rebirth.45 In this mode of divination,
eleven basic pebbles are employed, representing the obstacles associated with the deceased's vitality, destiny, constitutional type,
numeric square, trigram, year, month, day, planet, constellation and personal obstacles (rang-keg). Once these have been tallied, a pebble
of conclusive analysis is placed in the final row. If, as depicted on Supplementary Plate 19, fig. 10, this pebble of conclusive analysis turns
out to be white, it suggests rebirth among the gods; but if it is black, it suggests rebirth among the three lower existences; and if it is mot-
tled, comprising one white and one black component, it portends rebirth among human beings. Exemplary chart 9.5 is derived from
Bai-dkar bu-yig gshin-rtsis khra-ma'i dper-brjod gnad-bsdus. 46
9.5 Exemplary chart
0
vitality element (srog)
destiny element (dbang)
constitutional type (khams)
numeric square (rme-ba)
trigram (spar-kha)
year-sign (10)
Plate 19, fig. 10 (Ms II, ff. 16-18): Predicted results based on the conclusive analysis of the pebbles indicating the realm of subsequent rebirth (White Beryl, f. 363a)
Predicted results based on the conclusive analysis of the pebbles indicating the realm of subsequent rebirth (skye gtang-gcod 'bras-bu)
If the type of pebble of conclusive analysis a white pebble of conclusive analysis indicating a black pebble of conclusive analysis indicating
indicating the realm of subsequent rebirth the realm of subsequent rebirth
the realm of subsequent rebirth
month (zla-ba)
a mottled pebble of conclusive analysis indicating
day (nyi-ma)
the realm of subsequent rebirth
planet (gza)
(skye-gnas gtang-gcod rdel-dkar)
(skye-gnas rde'u nag-pa)
(skye-gnas gtang-gcod khra-bo)
constellation (skan)
the god realm (devaloka)
the animal realm (tīryagloka), the tormented spirit
the human realm (manuşyaloka)
is as follows (skye-gnas gtang-gcod ming)
the following among the three or five
realms of subsequent rebirth is indicated
(skye-gnas gsum-Inga)
realm (pretaloka) and the hells (narakaloka)
personal obstacles (rang-keg)
conclusive analysis (tang-gcod
X
0
སྐྱོ་གནང་གཅོད་འབྲས་
ད་
དུ་
ཀྱི་གནས་གར་ གཅད་རྗེས་དཀར་
Broducedido
todologia
U
een
Bradu
gyelmes
Plate 19, fig. 10



-
వరం
Play
కరువు
SHARE
మనం
S
Kiraa
సTARA
Jai
RAS
T



KRAN
OSISI
Miros
RE
SO
ES
2
2
2
BC
A



329
Divinations of death
Opposite Detail of Plate 19, fig. 10 (see p. 326), showing predictions of
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī, for whom this is the eleventh category, enumerates the eleven basic pebbles slightly differently, but the mode of cal-
culation and placement of the pebbles of conclusive analysis is identical (Moonbeams, f. 37a/b):
rebirth in the human realm
As for the eleventh category, concerning the realm of subsequent rebirth,
The place of rebirth is examined by means of pebbles representing:
The present year, the log-men, the numeric square, the trigram,
The present sectors of growth and decline,
The month, day, hour, planet, constellation
And the [year-sign of the most senior) living relative.
Two white (pebbles) should be placed for (rebirth among the gods,
One of each for (rebirth among] humans,
And two black ones for those who descend into evil existences.
In general, as illustrated on Plate 12, fig. 6, death coinciding with one of the three white numeric squares suggests a subsequent rebirth
among the gods; death coinciding with Black Two, Blue Three or Green Four suggests a subsequent rebirth among the three lower exis-
tences; while death coinciding with Red Seven, Red Nine and Yellow Five suggests a subsequent rebirth among the beings of the inter-
mediate state, and death coinciding with Yellow Five alone suggests a subsequent rebirth in the human realm.
བབས་སྨེ་
སྐྱེ་གནས་
Plate 12, fig. 6
Plate 12, fig. 6 (Ms l: ff. 51-53): Predictions concerning realms of subsequent rebirth (phyi-ma'i skye-gnas) consequent on death associated with a class of numeric squares (White Beryl, ff. 362b-364a)
When death coincides with the following
White 1/6/8
Black 2; Blue 3; Green 4
Red 7/9; Yellow 5
Yellow 5
classes of current numeric squares
(babs-sme)
the following subsequent rebirths are
gods (deva)
three lower existences (tridurgat)
beings of the intermediate state
human beings
predicted (skye-gnas)
More precisely, as illustrated on Plate 12, fig. 7, if the year, month, day and hour of death coincide with White One, and an image of
Avalokiteśvara is commissioned and the Six-syllable Mantra® is recited, one will have a subsequent rebirth as a man and persevere in the
practice of Buddhism. If the year, month, day and hour of death coincide with Black Two, however, one will be reborn in the hells, or else,
if that outcome can be averted by the commissioning of a stūpa and a Vajrapāņi image, one might take birth as a bear or monkey. If all the
aspects of death coincide with Blue Three, one will be reborn as an ox or a snowcock, but if that outcome can be averted by the recitation
of the Hundred-syllable Mantra," and the dedicating of offerings to Vajrasattva, one might take birth as a girl in some far-off western
land, where various different languages are spoken. If all the aspects of death coincide with Green Four, one will be reborn as a cuckoo,
but if that outcome can be averted by the commissioning of a Vajrapāņi image, one might be reborn as a rich girl in some far-off western
land. If all the aspects of death coincide with Yellow Five, one will be reborn as a monkey or a cock, but if that outcome can be averted by
the commissioning of a Sākyamuni Buddha image, and the recitation of the Vajracchedikāsūtra, one might be reborn as a boy in the south.
If all the aspects of death coincide with White Six, one will be reborn as a girl or an unfortunate person, but if that outcome can be averted
by the commissioning of an image of Usnīşa Sugata, one might be reborn as a talented person in the south. If all the aspects of death coin-
cide with Red Seven, one will be reborn as a demon, a jackal or a wolf, but if that outcome can be avoided by the commissioning of an
image of Tārā, one might be reborn as a Buddhist monk. If all the aspects of death coincide with White Eight, one will be reborn as a
woman, but if that outcome can be avoided by the commissioning of a Buddha image, one might be reborn as an artist or sculptor. Lastly,
if all the aspects of death coincide with Red Nine, one will be reborn as a dog or donkey, but if that outcome can be averted by the commis-
sioning of an image of Manjughoșa, one might be reborn as a wealthy man in Mon-yul.49



330
The White Beryl
Nagy
Plate 12, fig. 7
Plate 12, fig. 7 (Ms I: ff. 51-53): Predictions concerning places of subsequent rebirth (phyi-ma'i skye-gnas) consequent on death associated with specific numeric squares (White Beryl, ff. 362b-364a)
venion batman e
n el numerosas
mory mario gender an
White 1
Black 2
Blue 3
Green 4
Yellow 5
White 6
Red 7
White 8
Red 9
If the year, month, day
and hour of death coincide
with the following numeric
square (shi-ba'i sme-ba)
the following worst rebirth one will have a subsequent
one will be reborn in the hells
one will be reborn as an ox
one will be reborn as a cuckoo
one will be reborn as a monkey
one will be reborn as a girl or
one will be reborn as a woman
one will be reborn as a dog
one will be reborn as a demon,
a jackal or a wolf
will ensue (skye-gnas)
rebirth as a man and persevere
or a snowcock
or a cock
an unfortunate person
or donkey
in the practice of Buddhism if
an image of Avalokiteśvara is
commissioned and the Six
syllable Mantra is recited
or the following rebirth
ditto
but if that outcome can be
but if that outcome can be
but if that outcome can be
but if that outcome can be
will ensue (skye-gnas)
or else, if that outcome can be
averted by the commissioning
of a stūpa and a Vajrapāņ
image, one might take birth
but if that outcome can be
averted by the recitation of the
H undred-syllable Mantra, and
the dedicating of offerings to
but if that outcome can be
averted by the commissioning
of a stūpa and a Vajrapāņi
image, one might be reborn
as a rich girl in some far-off
but if that outcome can be
averted by the commissioning
of an image of Usmīşa
Sugata, one might be reborn
averted by the commissioning
of a Śākyamuni Buddha
image, and the Vajracchedikā
Sūtra, one might be reborn
avoided by the commissioning
of an image of Tārā, one
might be reborn as a monk
avoided by the commissioning
of a Buddha image, one might
averted by the commissioning
of an image of Manjughoșa,
be reborn as an artist
one might be reborn as
as a bear or monkey
Vajrasattva, one might take
as a talented person in
or sculptor
a wealthy man in Mon-yul
birth as a girl in some far-off
western land
as a boy in the south
the south
western land, where various
different languages are spoken
Predictions concerning the realm of previous and subsequent rebirth may also be determined on the basis of the year, month, day or hour of
death. Generally speaking in all such cases, as indicated on Supplementary Plate 20, fig. 2, if the conclusive analysis suggests that the vital-
ity element of the deceased coincides with the sectors of growth, it portends a subsequent rebirth among the gods (devaloka). Ifit suggests
that the deceased's body element has succumbed into a sector of decline, it portends a subsequent rebirth among the antigods (asuraloka). If
it suggests that the destiny element has succumbed, it portends a subsequent rebirth among humans (manusyaloka). If it suggests that the
luck element has succumbed, it portends a subsequent rebirth among animals (tīryagloka). If it suggests that the deceased’s life-spirit has
succumbed, it portends a subsequent rebirth among the tormented spirits (pretaloka); and if it suggests that the most excellent luck aspect
(rab-klungs) has succumbed, it portends a subsequent rebirth among the hells (narakaloka).
the life-spirit element of the deceased has
the most excellent luck element of the
succumbed (bla-pham)
deceased has succumbed (rab-klung pham)
Plate 20, fig. 2 (Ms II: ff. 19–24): Predicted places of subsequent rebirth based generally upon the comparison with the hour, month, day and hour of death (White Beryl, f. 363a/b)
Predicted places of subsequent rebirth based generally upon the comparison with the hour, month, day and hour of death (lo-zla zhag-dus bzhir thabs-'bras skye-gnas)
If the following type of conclusive the vitality element of the deceased coincides the body element of the deceased has the destiny element of the deceased has the luck element of the deceased has
analysis is present
with the sectors of growth (srog-dan succumbed (lus-pham)
succumbed (dbang-pham)
succumbed (klung-pham)
(gtang-gcod ming)
it portends a subsequent rebirth gods (devaloka)
antigods (asuraloka)
humans (manuşyaloka)
animals (tīryagloka)
in the following among the six
realms (skye-gnas drug)
tormented spirits (pretaloka)
hells (narakaloka)
Among them, those pertaining to the day of death are illustrated on Plate 12, fig. 8. For example, if death coincides with the mouse day,
one will have been born in the two previous lives as a snake and a horse, and will be subsequently reborn as a fortunate monk. If death
coincides with the ox day, one will have been born in the previous life as a human being, and will subsequently be reborn as an excellent
teacher. If death coincides with the day of the tiger, one will have been born in the previous life as a horse for ten days and in the next life
one will be reborn as a human being. If death coincides with the hare day, one will have been born in the previous life as a bird in the east-
ern direction, and in the next life one will be reborn as an ox, or as a human being. If death coincides with the dragon day, one will have
been born in the previous life for some days as a snake, and in the next lives one will be reborn as an ox, and then as a Bon-po. If death
coincides with the snake day, one will have been born in the previous life as an ox, and in the next life one will be born as the son of a
newly-wed couple. If death coincides with the horse day, one will have been born in the previous life as an ogre (srin-po), and in the next
life one will be reborn as the son of aged parents. If death coincides with the sheep day, one will have been born in the previous life as a
snake, and in the next life one will be reborn as a renunciate monk. If death coincides with the monkey day, one will have been born in the
previous life as a mouse, and in the next life one will be reborn as a bachelor (pho-reng). If death coincides with the bird day, one will have
been born in the previous life as a goose, and in the next life one will be reborn as the second of three brothers in a far-off western land. If
death coincides with the dog day, one will have been born in the previous life as a dog and in the next one will be reborn as the second of
three brothers in a far-off western land. If death coincides with the pig day, one will have been born in the previous life as a mantrin, and
in the next one will be reborn as a teacher.



331
Divinations of death
horse
sheep
monkey
bird
dog
pig
ogre (srin-po)
snake
mouse
goose
dog
mantrin
Plate 12, fig. 8 (Ms I, ff. 51-53): Predictions concerning places of subsequent rebirth (phyi-ma'i skye-gnas) consequent on death associated with specific days (White Beryl, ff. 3626–364a)
If the time of death coincides with mouse
OX
tiger
hare
dragon
snake
the following days (shi-dus nyi-ma)
the deceased's one or two
snake and horse human being horse (for ten days) bird (in the east) snake (for some days) ox
immediately preceding lives will
have been a (tshe-sngon)
and in the next life he or she will fortunate monk excellent teacher human being ox or human being o x and then as a son of newly-wed
be born as a (phyi-ma)
Bon-po
couple
son of aged parents
renunciate monk
bachelor
second of three brothers
se
second of three brothers
teacher
in a far-off western land
in a far-off western land
NWU
ནི་དུས་ཞིམ <)
Oc
saal
ཨེ་མ
Plate 12, fig. 8
As far as the hours are concerned, as indicated on Supplementary Plate 20, fig. 3, death coinciding with the hare or tiger hour suggests
rebirth among the gods (devaloka), death coinciding with the dragon or ox hour suggests rebirth among the antigods (asuraloka), death
coinciding with the snake or mouse hour suggests rebirth among humans (manusyaloka), death coinciding with the horse or pig hour sug-
gests rebirth among animals (tīryagloka), death coinciding with the sheep or dog hour suggests rebirth among the tormented spirits (pre-
taloka), while death coinciding with the monkey or bird hour suggests rebirth among the hells (narakaloka).
Plate 20, fig. 2
ལོཟླ་ཞགཔུས་འར་ཐབས་འབྲས་ཀྱི་གནས་
sisuca ista
Cat
རབ@་ཙ་ ཨམ་



S
керал
тар
Р))))))
The White Beryl
332
E
А4
с
е не
А
.
:
ДА
2
1
3



333
Divinations of death
Ogingarracott
ucaasi
कना
soll
DZWONIRILDI
PRO
ས་ཁོསྐྱེ་གནས་
རྣ་སཕྲུག།
Coches
(CO
23
Plate 20, fig. 3
Plate 20, fig. 3 (Ms II: ff. 19-24): Predictions regarding the six modes of subsequent rebirth based on the hour of death (White Beryl, f. 363b)
Predictions regarding the six modes of subsequent rebirth based on the hour of death (dus-tshod skye-gnas rnam-pa drug)
If death coincides with the following hour (dus-tshod)
tiger or hare
tiger or hare
dragon or ox
snake or mouse
the following subsequent rebirth is predicted among the gods
antigods
humans
six realms (skye-gnas drug)
(devaloka)
(asuraloka)
(manusyaloka)
horse or pig
sheep or dog
bird or monkey
animals
tormented spirits
hells
(tīryagloka)
(pretaloka)
(narakaloka)
In addition, the coincidence of death with the twelve sectors of growth and decline may also portend diverse modes of rebirth, as illus-
trated on Plate 12, fig. 9. For example, the coincidence of death with the sectors of foetus and clothing suggests a rebirth among the gods.
The coincidence of death with the sectors of birth and work suggests rebirth among the antigods. The coincidence of death with the sec-
tors of ablution and growth suggests birth among humans. The coincidence of death with the sectors of conception and ill-health sug-
gests rebirth among animals. The coincidence of death with the sectors of embryo and death suggests rebirth among the tormented
spirits (pretaloka), while the coincidence of death with the sectors of decline and tomb suggests rebirth among the hells.
In general, by examining the mode of death, it is possible to make predictions concerning the social class assumed
in the subsequent rebirth. For example, the mercantile class is suggested if the head of the corpse faces south, the royal class if it faces
east, the working class if it faces west, the priestly class if it faces north, and social outcasts if it faces in the intermediate directions.
Further detailed predictions may be made on the basis of the posture of the corpse.
Opposite Detail of Plate 20, fig. 3, showing predictions of rebirth in the
animal realms dependent on the horse or pig hour of death



334
The White Beryl
WA
དར་གུད་
སྙ་གནས་
Plate 12, fig. 9
Plate 12, fig. 9 (Ms I, ff. 51-53): Predictions concerning places of subsequent rebirth (phyi-ma'i skye-gnas) consequent on death associated with the sectors of growth and decline (White Beryl, ff. 3626–364a)
When death coincides with the following sectors of
foetus and clothing birth and work ablution and conception
embryo and death decline and tomb
growth and decline (dar-gud)
growth
and ill-health
the subsequent realm of rebirth will be as
gods
antigods
humans
animals
tormented spirits hells
follows (skye-gnas)
(devaloka)
(asuraloka)
(manusyaloka) (tīryagloka)
(pretaloka)
(narakaloka)
u Spirits
6. Predictions concerning Bon and Buddhist funeral rites compatible
with the accumulation of fundamental virtues (ra-mdar dge-
rtsa bzang-bas 'dur-ba'i lugs, White Beryl, f. 364a/b)
There are twelve special modes of funeral rite (dur-lugs bcu-gnyis) compatible with the accumulation of the excellent fundamental
virtues of the spiritual traditions. These comprise: the three funeral rites of the Bon tradition, the three funeral rites of the Buddhist
tradition, the three funeral rites of the gter-ma tradition, and the three funeral rites of the aspirational tradition (smon-lam lugs).
Among these, all of which are depicted on Plate 12, fig. 10, the three Bon rites are known as the “sunlight potency of the royal funeral
rite' (rgyal-shid nyin-thub), the ‘incense rite and grain-offering' (bsang-shid zu-lu) and the ‘entombment rite' (bang-so ru-can).50 The
three Buddhist rites are known as the ‘purification and guidance of the six classes of sentient being to higher realms of rebirth’
(sbyong-shing rigs-drug gnas-'dren), the ‘funeral rite combining meditation and feast-offerings' (sgom-shing tshogs 'dur), and the 'funeral
rite of aspiration towards the virtuous doctrines' (dkar-chos smon-lam 'dur). The three gter-ma rites are known as the 'construction of
temples and stūpas' (lha-khang mchod-rten brtsigs-pa), the 'making of offerings to the monastic community' (dge-'dun 'bul-ba), and
the ‘making of offerings to Bon priests and mantrins' (mgo-ban sngags-par 'bul-ba). Lastly, the three funeral rites of the aspirational
tradition (smon-lam lugs) are known as the ‘making of anonymous offerings to the populace' (dmangs-la ming-med-du gtong-ba), the 'con-
struction of boats for crossing dangerous gorges' (lam-'phrang gru-rdzing bzo-'chos-pa) and the ‘donating of irrigation water to the needy'
(stong gsos-chu gang gtong-ba).
In addition, there are helpful rituals that should be performed around the hour following the death. For example,
in the hare hour the Vajracchedikā should be recited and votive relics made, in the dragon hour the Sūtra of the Wise and Foolish (mDo-sde
mdzangs-blun) should be recited, and so forth. In other words, it is important that potential negative obstacles should be reversed by the
performance of acts of virtue dedicated on behalf of the deceased.
Plate 12, fig. 10
མིར་བརྩིགརྒྱལ་ཤིད་ཉིན་ཐུབ། །བསད་ཤད་བྲ་ལུ་ ཚད་
བབ་་ས་རུ་ཅན།
རིགས་དྲུགནས་འདྲེན་
སྦོམ་ཤིད་ཚོགས་འདུར། དཀར་ཆོས་སྨོན་ལ་འདུན།
LON
SER
AVA
SEN
CORO
ANA
མགོ་བན་སཊ་པར་འབུལ་བ། ། དམར་མིང་མེད་གཏོད་
ལམ་འཕྲེང་བ་བ།
མིང་བཅུས ལྷ་ཁང་མཆོད་རྟེན་བརྩིག དགེ་འདུན་འབུལ་བ།
འདར་ལུག
སོང་པས་ཆུ་གང་གཏོང་བ་
བརྙེས།
QEB
Plate 12, fig. 10 (Ms I, ff. 51–53): Predictions concerning Bon and Buddhist funeral rites compatible with the accumulation of fundamental virtues (mdar dge-rtsa bzang-bas 'dur-ba'i lugs; White Beryl, f. 364a/b)
Names of the twelve special modes 'sunlight potency of the royal funeral rite' 'incense rite and grain-offering'
'entombment rite'
'purification and guidance of the
of funeral (ming bcu-gnyis)
(rgyal-shid nyin-thub)
(bsang-shid zu-lu)
(bang-so ru-can)
six classes of sentient beings to higher
'funeral rite combining meditation and
feast-offerings' (sgom-shing tshogs 'dur)
'funeral rite of aspiration towards the
virtuous doctrines' (dkar-chos smon-lam 'dur)
realms of rebirth'(sbyong-shing rigs-
drug gnas-'dren)
Illustration of the twelve special
which is a Bon ritual
which is a Bon ritual
which is a Bon ritual
which is a Buddhist ritual
which is a Buddhist ritual
which is a Buddhist ritual
modes of funeral rite
('dur-lugs bcu-gnyis)
Names of the twelve special modes
of funeral (ming bcu-gnyis)
'making of offerings to the monastic
'making of anonymous offerings to
'construction of boats for crossing
'donating of irrigation water to the needy
'construction of temples and stūpas'
(Iha-khang mchod-rten brtsigs-pa)
'making of offerings to Bon priests and
mantrins' (mgo-ban sngags-par 'bul-ba)
community' (dge-'dun 'bul-ba)
the populace'
dangerous gorges'
(stong gsos-chu gang gtong-ba)
(dmangs-la ming-med-du gtong-ba)
which is an aspirational ritual
(lam-'phrang gru-rdzing bzo-'chos-pa)
which is an aspirational ritual
Illustration of the twelve special
which is a gter-ma ritual
which is a gter-ma ritual
which is a gter-ma ritual
which is an aspirational ritual
modes of funeral rite
('dur-lugs bcu-gnyis)



335
Divinations of death
In this technique, twenty-eight divination pebbles are employed, comprising four resultant pebbles and twenty-four pebbles represent-
ing the various categories of helpful virtuous actions. The former are illustrated in exemplary chart 9.6, derived from Bai-dkar bu-yig
gshin-rtsis khra-ma'i dper-brjod gnad-bsdus, which recommends rites associated with either the general Buddhist tradition or that of the
gter-ma tradition in particular. 51
9.6 Exemplary chart
rites of the Bon tradition
rites of the Buddhist tradition
rites of the gter-ma tradition
0
0
X
rites of the aspirational tradition
7. Predictions concerning distinctive types of corpse
(ro-rigs dbye-ba, White Beryl, ff. 3646–365b)
While the ancient and new traditions of elemental divination list diverse categories of corpse (ro-rigs), the enumeration of thirteen (ro-
rigs bcu-gsum) depicted on Plate 12, fig. 11 reflects the synthesis presented by Sangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho in White Beryl. These comprise
‘auspicious' aged corpses (bkra), infant corpses (sri'u), injured corpses (gri), corpses afflicted by ancestor spirits (mtshun), corpses afflicted
by male countryside gods (yul-Iha) and by lake-dwelling mermaids (mo-sman), youthful male corpses (ro-gog), youthful female corpses
(sbre-shal), homeless corpses (bzed), childless corpses (rabs-chad), inauspicious corpses (gshis-ngan), murdered corpses (dme-ro) and lep-
rous or infected corpses (sha-ya).
Each of these types of corpse has several subdivisions. For example, there are five types of auspicious corpse
(bkra-rigs lnga), namely: those over sixty who have many children (bkra-rgyal), those over seventy who have a spouse and great-grand-
sons (bkra-mun), those over sixty who have grandsons but no spouse (bkra-phyed), those over sixty who are widowed but have children
(bkra-yugs), and those over sixty who die in old age after having had many accomplishments (bkra-shis).52 There are six types of infant
corpses (sri'u rigs-drug), namely: those who are stillborn (shang-dkar), those who die after whimpering (zla-ba'i rdib), those who die after
crying for a day (grags-brgyal), those who die after being able to eat ('bun-zan), those who die after being able to crawl (byin-sha gom-pa
tshugs-pa), and those who die after being able to play (mon-lug rtsed-mo nus-pa).53
There are four types of injured corpses (grir-shi bzhi), namely: savagely injured corpses of those who die
instantly (gri-rgod), lightly wounded corpses of those who die after one day of medication (gri-dbyung), impaled corpses (gri-bag)
and corpses mauled by wild yaks or tigers (lha-ba grag). There are three kinds of corpses afflicted by ancestor spirits (mtshun rnam-
pa gsum), known as those afflicted by the highest ancestral spirits (mtshun rab yod-po-che), who strike boys on the right side and girls on
the left side; those afflicted by the mediocre ancestral spirits (mtshun 'bring-po), who strike those with many sons; and those afflicted by the
lowest ancestor spirits (mtshun-gyi tha-ma), who strike those on the point of childbirth. There are three or four types of corpse afflicted by
male countryside gods (pho yul-Iha rigs-bzhi), namely: boys afflicted at the age of one, eight, nine or thirteen; and three types afflicted by
lake-dwelling mermaids (mo-sman rigs-gsum), namely: the highest sort (mtsho-sman rab), who afflict girls aged thirteen to fifteen; the
mediocre type (sman-'bring), who afflict girls aged eight, nine, eleven and twelve; and the lowest sort (sman-bu chung), who afflict girls
aged three to seven. The term 'youthful male corpse' (ro-gog) refers to those of unmarried males aged up to twenty, and the term 'youthful
female corpse' (sbre-shal) to those of unmarried females up to the age of twenty. Since both are considered extremely impure they should
be disposed of in unseen crevices or caves. Homeless corpses (bzed) are those of homeless males or females aged fifteen to seventeen.
Then, there are three kinds of childless corpse (rabs-chad rnam-pa gsum), namely the ‘white sort' (rabs-chad dkar-po), referring to someone
whose son has already died; the ‘variegated sort' (rabs-chad khra-bo), referring to someone whose daughter has already died; and the
'black sort' (rabs-chad nag-po), referring to someone who has had neither son nor daughter. In addition, there are three types of inauspi-
cious corpses (gshis-ngan rnam-gsum), namely: victims of suicide (Icebs), victims of unbearable pregnancy (snel-ma), and victims of poison-
ing (dug). There are three kinds of corpse which are victims of blood feuds (dme-ro rigs-gsum), namely: corpses of wives murdered by their
husbands, corpses of husbands murdered by their wives, and corpses of brothers-in-law murdered by sons-in-law (and vice versa). Lastly,
there are the leprous corpses (sha-ya), and by extension, the seven types of infected corpse (gcong-can rnam-pa bdun), namely those
infected by tumours, dropsy, rheumatism, emaciation, ulcers, diarrhoea and kidney failure; as well as the seven types of disabled corpse
(skyon-can bdun), namely those formerly afflicted by deafness, dumbness, blindness, lameness, arthritis, podagra and speech impediments.
Plate 12, fig. 11
མང་
།
བཀྲ་
1992
Dead
ཡུལ་ལྷ
མི་ན་
རོ་གོག་ སུཤལ
རབས་ཆད | ཤེས་༨ན་ དམེར་
ཤ་ཡ་
རོགས།
(
AS
youthful female
homeless corpses
inauspicious corpses murdered corpses
leprous or infected
youthful male
corpses (ro-gog)
childless corpses
(rabs-chad)
corpses afflicted by
lake-dwelling
mermaids (mo-sman)
corpses (sbre-sha)
(bzed)
(gshis-ngan)
(dme-ro)
Plate 12, fig. 11 (Ms I, ff. 51–53): Predictions concerning distinctive types of corpse (ro-rigs dbye-ba; White Beryl, ff. 3646–365b)
Names of the types auspicious aged infant corpses injured corpses corpses afflicted by corpses afflicted by
of corpses (ming corpses (bkra) (sri'u)
(gr)
ancestor spirits male countryside
(mtshun)
gods (yul-Iha)
Illustration of the five types
six types
four types
three types
three or four types
types of corpses
(ro-rigs)
=
=====
===
corpses (sha-ya)
four tunes
three types
one type
one type
two types
three types
three types
three types
various types



336
The White Beryl
Generally speaking, in this mode of divination, thirteen basic pebbles are deployed, along with 135 pebbles of symbolic recognition.
Exemplary chart 9.7, illustrating the tabulation of the basic pebbles, suggests that the deceased is childless. 54
9.7 Exemplary chart
auspicious aged corpses (bkra)
infant corpses (sri'!)
injured corpses (gr)
corpses afflicted by ancestor spirits (mtshun)
corpses afflicted by male countryside gods (yul-Iha)
corpses afflicted by lake-dwelling mermaids (mo-sman)
youthful male corpses (ro-gog)
youthful female corpses (sbre-sha)
homeless corpses (bzed)
childless corpses (rabs-chad)
inauspicious corpses (gshis-ngan)
murdered corpses (dme-ro)
leprous or infected corpses (sha-ya)
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī enumerates eleven types of corpse, rather than thirteen. His summary is as follows (Moonbeams, ff. 365–37a):
The ninth category concerns the eleven types of corpse,55
These comprise: leprous corpses, the six types of childless corpse, 56
The three types of corpse which are victims of blood feuds,57
The eight types of disabled corpse,58 the five auspicious corpses,59
The six types of infant corpse,60 the four types of injured corpse,61
The three types of inauspicious corpse, 62
The type afflicted by ancestor spirits, also called the twild' type,63
The weak type, 64 and the evil type.65
White pebbles should be placed if any of these are indicated,
And black ones if they are not.
8. Predictions concerning funerals based on the distinct calculations of
the five elements ('byung-Inga sil-bu'i rtsis-kyi dur-thob;
White Beryl, ff. 365–367a)
Twenty-five gods are said to be present at funerals held in conjuntion with mostly positive predictions, and this indicates there will be
progressive development for the bereaved relatives and an increase in wealth and property. Conversely, twenty-five malevolent forces
are said to be present when the predictions are mostly negative, and the tears will never dry, while humans and animals will be subjected
to disease and primordial bewitchers (ye-'brog). Since funerals have such diverse outcomes, it is important to know whether certain meth-
ods of funeral are appropriate or not. Generally speaking, cremations are carried out by means of the fire element, interments by means
of the earth element, transportations or submersions by means of the water element, entombments by means of the iron element, and
mountain disposals or sky burial by means of the wood element.
Plate 12, fig. 12
༧་༩
སུ
་
་
དུར་ལྔའི་གཟུགས།
གཤིན་པོའི་ལེགས་
འོས དབང་ཁམས།
སྤར་སྨེ་
གཟའ་སྐར།
ཤི་ཟླ་ཕ་བུ་ཚ་བོའི་ལོ་རྟ།
།
༡s. ༡༧༡༨
2༠༢༠32:
༡༠ ༡༡
༢༢ ༡༢ ༡༤
1:|:
ཀྱི་
ནད་རིགས།
མཛ་དམུ་ཆུ་གྲུམ་བུ་སྐྲུན་
ལྷོག།འབྲས།གཟའ།གཡན་
པ༣ བད་ནད། དྲག། དམེ།
གྲང་བ། ཐིབས་གྲི། གླང་མཆིན་ནད། ལོང་བ། །
ལུག་གི། སུབས།་ མཛེ། གག་ལྡེག། གྲུམ་
སྔགས་རིགས། ། བུ། དམེ་བན་བོན་
རྒོད་གནང། 4 །
སེར་ནད།ཚ་བ། ཚེས་ཚིག། འགགས་གྱི་ མཉིsར་ནར་
གླ་ཀློ་མཁའ་ནད། དམུ་ཆུ། ཆབ་བྱས་བསར་དོང་བསྐུར།
ལྔ་གི། སྡུག་པ། བཀྲ་མིཉྩ། སྙོག།བོད།རྐྱང་རྒྱན་སྒོར།
པོའི་ཀ་མད་སུསྤྱི་བྱེ་ཕག་གདོ། བཀྲ1སིའུད་
མ
་་་་་་་



337
Divinations of death
S
UDUUU99
SES
KISS
Above Detail of Plate 20, fig. 4 (see p. 338), showing the inauspicious
cremation of a child aged fifteen or under, likened to 'a young
chick snatched by a hawk'
According to the ancient system of divination, these five funeral methods are determined after examining the corpses of deceased persons
who had inauspicious or auspicious vitality elements. For example, in the case of cremation, as illustrated on Plate 12, fig. 12, if the
deceased has the bird or monkey year-sign, the iron constitutional type, the Dva trigram and one of the three white numeric squares,
while the planet is Venus, the constellations those of the west (see above, pp. 110–111; Plate 2, fig. 5, nos 37–45) and three generations
including father and son have the same bird or monkey sign, iron is the presiding element, especially in cases when the deceased has had
leprosy, dropsy, rheumatism, tumours, muscular spasms, ulcers, stroke, eczema, phlegm diseases or podagra, or else if the deceased is the
victim of a vendetta. Such corpses should not be cremated, particularly during the first or second autumn month.
Plate 12, fig. 12 (Ms I, ff. 51-53): Predictions concerning the distinct calculations of the five elemental funerals ('byung-Inga sil-bu'i rtsis-kyi dur-thob; White Beryl, ff. 365-367a)
cremation
interment
entombment
water burial
sky burial
bird or monkey
mouse or pig
tiger or hare
horse or snake
ox, sheep, dog or dragon
The following form among the five types of
funeral should not be employed (dur-Inga'i gzugs)
when the deceased's year-sign is the
following (gshin-po'i lo)
and the deceased's constitutional type is
the following (rus-dbang-khams)
and the deceased's current trigram and
numeric square are the following (spar-sme)
and the deceased's planet and constellation
iron
water
wood
fire
earth
Dva and White 1/6/8
Kham and Black 2 or Blue 3
Zin and Green 4
Li and Red 7/9
Khen, Khon, Gin or Zon and Yellow 5
Venus and the western constellations
Moon or Mercury and the northern
Jupiter and the eastern constellations
Sun or Mars and the southern constellations
(nos 25–33)
Saturn and the intermediate constellations
(nos 24, 36, 46, 48, 60)
are the following (gza'-skar)
(nos 37-45)
constellations (nos 49–57)
(nos 13–21)
bird or monkey
mouse or pig
tiger or hare
horse or snake
ox, sheep, dog or dragon
and the sign of the month of death is the
following, in the case of three successive
generations (shi-zla pha bu-tsha-bo'i lo-stags)
cold diseases, or accidental death due to
and the deceased has had one of the
following illnesses (nad-rigs)
leprosy, dropsy, rheumatism, tumours, muscular
spasms, ulcers, stroke, eczema, phlegm diseases,
podagra or if it has been slain in a blood feud
(mdzel dmu-chul grum-bul skranl Ihog 'bras/ gza'I
avalanches, fatal accidents caused by bulls
or rams, crushing injuries and stroke (grang-bal
thibs-gril glang-lugl gril subs/ snags- rigs)
liver diseases, intestinal diseases, accidental death heart diseases, fevers, burns, barbarous death (kla-klo), accidental death due to asphyxia ('gags-gr), spleen
due to angina, muscular spasm, or rheumatism, dropsy or kidney diseases, and in cases when a child diseases or death due to an avalanche or being cast
or if the corpse has been slain in a blood feud, has died accidentally, there has been acute muscular into a pit, or due to tigers, donkeys, or wild asses, or
or if it is that of a Bon-po or Buddhist who has
spasm (Ihog-pa), the corpse is of the auspicious or
in cases when the corpse is that of an insane person,
gyan-pal bad-nadi dragl dme)
been cursed, or else if it has contracted some infantile type, or else it has been stillborn, drowned or
other fatal disease (mchin-nadl long-bal mjel gag- widowed, or else it is that of a demented person of the
Ihogl grum-bul dmel ban-bonl rbod-gtong/ shi mouse or pig year (snying-nadi tsha-bal mes-tshig
kla-klol mkhal-nadl dmu-chul bu-gril lhog-pal bkral
sri'ul thon-bul chu-gril yugs-sal byi-phag rmugs-ro)
or one of the auspicious or infant types ('gags-
gril mcher-nadi rbab-byas bsadl dong-bskyarl
stagl bongl rkyangl rkyenl smyo-rol bkral sriu)



338
The White Beryl
There are four specific types of inauspicious cremation; these are illustrated on Supplementary Plate 20, fig. 4. They comprise the follow-
ing. The cremation of a deceased person who has lived up to the age of sixty without getting divorced, and whose son has not died, resem-
bles thin branches being scythed. The cremation of a deceased person who has lived up to the age of seventy or eighty, but is not without
sustenance despite having been divorced and witnessed the death of a son, resembles an impoverished trader devoid of merchandise. The
cremation of a child aged fifteen or under resembles a young chick being snatched by a hawk; and the cremation of an invalid subject to
chronic wounds, consumption or weight-loss, deafness and other physical disabilities, will provoke diseases due to serpentine spirits and
resembles putrefying meat being carried off by maggots.
if the deceased has had chronic wounds,
Plate 20, fig. 4 (Ms II, ff. 19-23): Four types of inauspicious cremation (White Beryl, f. 366a/b)
If the following type of deceased if the deceased has lived up to the age if the deceased has lived up to the age
person indicated by the basic of sixty without getting divorced and the of seventy or eighty, and is not without
divination pebble
son has not died (skye-nas drug-cu'i sustenance even though divorced and
(rdel-rtsa'i ming)
bar zla66 ma-bral-zhing bu ma sh) the son has died (btsas-nas bdun-cu
if the deceased is a child aged fifteen
or under (byis-pa lo-Inga bcu'i bar)
deafness, harelip, decrepit posture, or six
fingers (yun-ring rma-'on shor rgur
drug-lag)
brgyad-cu'i bar zla-bral bu-shi-kyang
as phong-med
and is then cremated
and is then cremated
and is then cremated
and is then cremated
it will be inauspicious for the living, like
it will be inauspicious because poverty
it will be inauspicious, like a young chick
it will be inauspicious because diseases
is cremated (sreg-pa)
the following negative predicted
results will ensue
('bras-bu ngan-pa) 67
thin branches beings scythed.
will ensue, like a trader devoid of
snatched by a hawk.
due to nāga spirits will afflict the living.
merchandise.
like putrefying meat carried off by maggots.
However, as depicted on Supplementary Plate 20, fig. 5, it will be auspicious to cremate those of the fire trigram or numeric squares when
the year of death coincides with an ox, dragon, sheep, dog, horse or snake sign, and a majority of the living relatives have the mouse
or pig sign.
In the case of interment or earth burial, as illustrated on Plate 12, fig. 12 (see pp. 336–337), if the deceased has the
mouse or pig year-sign, the water constitutional type, the Kham trigram, and either Black Two or Blue Three, while the planet is the
Moon or Mercury, the constellations are those of the north (49–57), and three generations including father and son have the same mouse
or pig sign, then water is the presiding element, especially in cases when the deceased has had cold diseases, or accidental death due to ava-
lanches, or fatal accidents caused by bulls or rams, or crushing injuries (bsubs) and stroke. Such corpses should not be buried underground,
particularly during the first or second winter month, and it will be inauspicious for those with a water destiny element to be buried.
Plate 20, fig. 4
རྡོས་ཀྱི་མིང་
5694 igauza cazajn rastgruid graig
Jamur
agurgraatligi
བསཞས་པོ་ན་སྦྱརྒྱདཀུའི་བར་མ་ལ་བམ་ཤི་ བྱིས་ས་ས་སངསgའབར་
འ ཕོ་མེད་
ཨུནང་ཆུ་ཤ་སར་ར་དྲུན་ལག་
06
Ou



339
Divinations of death
རབཟང་མིང་
youre aſiat
arsztastic
szinst
odlogamas
qugrast
ནས་ས་བཟང་བ་
སྐྱོང་བར་བཟང་བ་
કે જાહa(
32
Plate 20, fig. 5
auspicious burial (sba-bar bzang-ba)
auspicious entombment (sgrub-par bzang-ba)
auspicious water burial (skyur-bar bzang-ba)
auspicious sky burial in the mountains
(ri-skyel bzang-ba)
sky burial
interment
entombment
water burial
bird, monkey, ox, sheep, dog or dragon
mouse, pig, bird or monkey
tiger, hare, mouse or pig
horse, snake, tiger or hare
Plate 20, fig. 5 (Ms II, ff. 19–23): The five types of auspicious funeral (White Beryl, ff. 3666–367a)
The following are the types of
auspicious cremation (sreg-pa bzang-ba)
auspicious funeral (dur-bzang ming)
illustrated as follows (dur-Inga)
cremation
which are recommended when the
ox, sheep, dog, dragon, horse or snake
deceased dies in one of the following
years (gnam-gshin lo)
while the majority of living relatives have mouse or pig
the following year-signs (gson-lo)
and the following trigrams or
Li; and Red 7 or 9
numeric squares (spar-rme)
tiger or hare
horse or snake
ox, sheep, dog or dragon
bird or monkey
Kham or Dva; and
Kham or Zin; and
Dva, Khen, Khon, Gin or Zon; and
White 1, 6, 8; or Yellow 5
Li or Zin; and
Red 7,9; or Green 4
White 1, 6, 8; Black 2; or Blue 3
Black 2; Blue 3; or Green 4
However, as indicated on Supplementary Plate 20, fig. 5, it will be auspicious to bury those who die in a bird, monkey, ox, dragon, sheep
or dog year, if the majority of the living relatives have the tiger or hare sign and trigrams or numeric squares representing the iron or
earth element.
In the case of entombment, or iron burial, as illustrated on Plate 12, fig. 12 (see pp. 336–337), if the deceased has
the tiger or hare year-sign, the wood constitutional type, the Zin trigram and the numeric square Green Four, while the planet is Jupiter,



340
The White Beryl
У.
.
3
Pe
А
Аан A
их
.
у
АН



341
Divinations of death
Opposite Detail of Plate 20, fig. 20 (see p. 331), showing predictions
of rebirth in the god realms
the constellations those of the east (13–21), and three generations including father and son have the same tiger or hare sign, then wood is
the presiding element, especially in cases when the deceased has had liver diseases, intestinal diseases, accidental death due to angina,
muscular spasm, or rheumatism, or if the corpse has been slain in a blood feud, or if it is that of a Bon-po or Buddhist who has been cursed,
or else if it has contracted some other fatal disease. In all such cases, and during the first or second spring month, the dead should not be
entombed.
However, as indicated on Supplementary Plate 20, fig. 5, it will be auspicious to entomb those who die in a mouse,
pig, bird or monkey year, if the majority of living relatives have the horse or snake sign and trigrams or numeric squares representative
of either the water or iron element.
In the case of water burial, as illustrated on Plate 12, fig. 12, if the deceased has the horse or snake year-sign, the
fire constitutional type, the Li trigram and the numeric square Red Seven or Red Nine, while the planet is Mars or the Sun, the constella-
tions those of the south (25–33), and three generations including father and son have the same horse or snake sign, then fire is the presid-
ing element, especially in cases when the deceased has had heart diseases, fevers, burns, barbarous death (kla-klo), kidney diseases or
dropsy, and in cases when a child has died accidentally (bu-gri), there has been acute muscular spasm (lhog-pa) and the corpse is auspicious
(bkra), or that of a child (sri'u), or else it has been stillborn, drowned, widowed, or else it is that of a demented person of the mouse or pig
year. In all such cases, and during the first or second summer month, the dead should not be disposed of in rivers or at sea.
However, as depicted on Supplementary Plate 20, fig. 5, it will be auspicious to give water burial or sea burial to
those who die in a tiger, hare, mouse or pig year, if the majority of living relatives have an ox, dragon, sheep or dog sign and trigrams or
numeric squares representative of either the water or wood element.
Lastly, in the case of sky burial, or wood burial in the mountains, as illustrated on Plate 12, fig. 12, if the deceased
has the ox, dragon, sheep or dog year-sign, the earth constitutional type, the Khen, Khon, Gin or Zon trigram, and the numeric square
Yellow Five, while the planet is Saturn, the constellations those of the intermediate directions (24, 36, 46, 48, 60), and three generations
including father and son have the same ox, dragon, sheep or dog sign, then earth is the presiding element, especially in cases when the
deceased has had an accidental death due to asphyxia ('gags-gri) or spleen diseases, or has been killed by an avalanche, cast into a pit or
died due to injuries inflicted by tigers, donkeys or wild asses; or in cases when the corpse is that of an insane person, or one of the auspi-
cious (bkra) or infant (sri'u) types. In all such cases, and during the four last seasonal months, the dead should not be disposed of by sky
burial in the mountains.
However, as indicated on Supplementary Plate 20, fig. 5, it will be auspicious to give sky burial to those who die in
a horse, snake, tiger or hare year, if the majority of living relatives have the bird or monkey sign and trigrams or numeric squares repre-
sentative of either the fire or wood element.
In this mode of divination, sixty-five divinatory pebbles are generally utilised, along with five pebbles of conclu-
sive analysis. Exemplary chart 9.7 illustrates this. 68
9.7 Exemplary chart
Mountainside
Cremation
Earth burial
Entombment
Water burial
(i.e. sky) burial
0
Deceased's constitutional type
XX
X
00
ОХ
XX
Year of death
00
ox
O
Month of death
00
XX
Ox
ox
Day of death
0
XX
00
Ox
Hour of death
0
XX
X
00
Planet of death
XX
ОХ
00
Constellation of death
XX
ОХ
00
Vitality element of death
XX
ОХ
00
Body element of death
ОХ
00
Destiny element of death
ОХ
00
xx
Luck element of death
Ox
00
XX
Numeric square of death
ОХ
00
XX
Trigram of death
000
XX
Pebbles of conclusive analysis
0
0x
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī, for whom this is the eighth category, offers the following summary in verse (Moonbeams, f. 36b):
The eighth category concerns the distinct elemental funerals.
And black ones if any of the five types of] funeral
Inhibit (any of the thirteen aspects).
Pebbles are placed representing the contrast
White pebbles are placed if there is a coincidence of the earth or water elements;
Between the following thirteen aspects and the five types of funeral.
[The thirteen aspects comprise): the constitutional type of the deceased,
The present year, month, day, hour, planet, constellation,
Vitality, body, destiny, luck, numeric square and trigram.
And black ones (if there is a coincidence of the wood, iron or fire elements.
Thus, sixty-five distinct pebbles are utilised.
Now, the five types of funeral comprise: wood or sky burial, 69
Fire or cremation, 70 earth or interment, 71
Iron or entombment 72 and water or sea burial. 73
White pebbles are placed if [any of those aspects of the deceased
Inhibits (any of the five types of funeral),



342
The White Beryl
9. Predictions concerning the accoutrements of the corpse and the funeral
procession (ro-chas-dang ro-rdzongs, White Beryl, ff. 367a-375a)
The accoutrements of the corpse and the manner of its disposal are the subjects of the next topic. In brief, as illustrated on Plate 12, fig.
13, property should be disposed of along with the corpse, corresponding to the trigram coincident with the time of death. For example, if
death coincides with the Li trigram, the following should be despatched: a rose bush, magpies, rice, turquoise, hats, felt, the head of an ox
or horse, and melted butter. If death coincides with the Khon trigram, the following should be despatched: willows, plovers, linseed,
sleeves, warming medications and a srang weight?4 of shoulder mutton. If death coincides with the Dva trigram, the following should be
despatched: artemisia, finch feathers, Tibetan clothing and armour and the crooked left ribs of a goat or deer. If death coincides with the
trigram Khen, the following should be despatched: poplars, cranes, buckwheat, dog meat, marmot flesh, the flesh of the left leg and a cot-
ton shoe. If death coincides with the Kham trigram, the following should be despatched: potentilla, red-billed choughs, peas, the calf flesh
of an ox or pig, intestines and trousers. If death coincides with the trigram Gin, the following should be despatched: juniper, owls, bro-
cade, wheat and a right leg. If death coincides with the trigram Zin, the following should be despatched: birch, parrots, tiger-skin,
crooked donkey ribs and waistbelts. Lastly, if death coincides with the trigram Zon, the following should be despatched: pine, hoopoes,
silken robes and the flesh of a hybrid cow or ox.
བབས་སར།
SED
ERRED
D83)
Plate 12, fig. 13
Plate 12, fig. 13 (Ms I: ff. 51-53): Predictions concerning the accoutrements of the corpse and the funeral procession (ro-chas-dang ro-rdzongs, White Beryl, ff. 367a-375a)
When death coincides with Li
Khon
Dva
Khen
Kham
Gin
Zin
Zon
the following current trigram
(babs-spar)
Willows, plovers, linseed, sleeves,
artemisia, finch feathers, Tibetan
birch, parrots, tiger skin, crooked
pine, hoopoes, silken robes, and
the following items should be rose bushes, magpies, rice,
despatched with the corpse turquoise, hats, felt, the head of
potentilla, red-billed choughs,
peas, the calf flesh of an ox or pig,
poplars, cranes, buckwheat, dog
meat, marmot flesh, the flesh of the
left leg and a cotton shoe.
juniper, owls, brocade, wheat, and
a right leg.
warming medications and a srang
donkey ribs, and waistbelts.
clothing and armour, and the
crooked left ribs of a goat or deer.
the flesh of a hybrid cow or ox.
(ro-rdzongs)
an ox or horse, and melted butter.
weight of shoulder mutton.
intestines, and trousers.
At this juncture, White Beryl focuses on the general and particular methods of disposal recommended for corpses of the auspicious type
(bkra),75 including the so-called phra-men dgu-skor, in which different procedures are suggested for male and female corpses depending
upon their ages, and for corpses of the infant type (sri'u).
The funeral procedures for the most important and auspicious of all corpses are depicted on Plate 13, fig. 2.
Among them, as far as the appropriate funeral pyre for kings (mnga'-bdag rgyal-po'i spur) is concerned, the corpse should be adorned with
fine silk, and ornaments of gold, silver, copper, iron and gemstones, and then not cremated but entombed. In this way, the funeral will
enhance the king's lineage, reaching out to the heavens.
As far as the appropriate funeral pyre for ministers is concerned (chab-srid blon-po'i spur), the corpse may be either
cremated or interred. If instead it is entombed, four arrows should be wrapped in silk and planted in the four directions, and the corpse
should be surrounded with many sorts of grain. In this way, the funeral will enhance the minister's residence, maintaining it for nine
generations.
As far as the appropriate funeral pyre for learned and venerable scholars (mkhas-btsun pandita'i spur) is concerned,
an excellent crematorium should be built, and before it a mandala-offering of scented oils and flower bouquets should be arrayed. The
corpse should be wrapped in fine silk, and then cremated on a pyre of sandalwood or juniper, while extensive offerings should be made.
After the bone relics have formed, they should be set within a stūpa of precious metals and gemstones, wrapped in silk of five colours, and
then placed in the uppermost storey of the temple as perpetual objects of veneration. In this way, the funeral pyre of a learned and venera-
ble scholar should support the Buddhist teachings, and not leave his residence void.
As far as the appropriate funeral pyre for venerable pious attendants (nyan-thos btsun-pa'i spur) is concerned: an
excellent crematorium should be built, the corpse should be wrapped in a religious robe (chos-gos), and cremated on a pyre of pinewood,
while extensive offerings should be made. The bone relics should be made into votive terracotta images (satstsha), and placed inside a
stūpa as an object of veneration. In this way, the funeral pyre of a pious attendant will maintain the Vinaya without interruption.
As far as the appropriate funeral pyre for powerful mantrins (sngags-pa mthu-chen spur) is concerned: a
crematorium should be constructed within the hermitage, and the corpse should be placed upon a throne supported by lotus, sun
and moon cushions, wrapped in the deceased's own mantra robes (sngags-gos), and inserted within a wooden coffin with the legs
crossed and the hands holding a rosary and a ritual dagger (kīla), while in front is arrayed a red gtor-ma offering symbolic of human
flesh (dmar-chen), and mounds of mustard seeds are piled around. The corpse is then cremated on a pyre of incense and frankincense.
In this way, the offerings of enlightened activity are not interrupted, the familial line of the mantrin is enhanced, and the ‘vajra-
bridge of transmission, through which the teachings of the way of secret mantras are handed down from one generation to the next,
is not cut off.



343
Divinations of death
As far as the appropriate funeral pyre for adherents of the gShen-rab Bon tradition (gshen-rab bon-po'i spur) is concerned: a coffin of slate
should be constructed within a temple on a rocky mountain, and the corpse, wrapped in blue silk of five types, should be placed on a seat,
inscribed with the svāstika motif, while a drum and cloche (shang) should be placed in the hands. In front a divine arrow with a white
feather, adorned with five colours of silk, should be placed, along with the first fruits of a wine-offering. Incense and aromatic woods
should be added, a wreath of white hair (bal-thod) should be fastened to the head, and around it grains and wood should be placed. In this
way, the excellent tomb of a Bon priest will ensure that the Bon lineage is not ended.
As far as the appropriate funeral pyre for astrologers (ye-mkhyen rtsis-mkhan spur) is concerned: an excellent cre-
matorium should be constructed in a place resembling a divination turtle, and below it the sequence of the elements should be inscribed.
In front, offerings, gtor-ma offerings and divinatory charts of hidden points (gab-tshe) should be arrayed, and various grains placed. A tur-
ban of five colours should be fastened to the head, and an arrow and cane placed in the hands, while the body should be anointed with the
six excellent medicinal substances (rtsi-sman bzang drug). 76 In this way, the funeral will enhance the lineage of astrological science, ensur-
ing that the residences which maintain this science are never ending
As far as the appropriate funeral pyre for physicians ('tsho-byed sman-pa'i spur) is concerned: the corpse should be
anointed with fragrant medicines, a lancet and medicine bottle (par-bu) should be placed in the hands, and various medicinal substances
placed in front, while the body should be wrapped in blue silk and positioned beside a medicinal tree. In this way, the lineage of physicians
will be enhanced.
As far as the appropriate funeral pyre for artists (lha-bzo bris-lugs spur) is concerned: the body should be wrapped
in white silk, a brush and pen should be placed in the hands, and canvas, paper and paint pots set in front. Then the corpse should be
placed within a slate tomb in an excellent rocky mountain location. In this way, the funeral will enhance the lineage of artists.
As far as the appropriate funeral pyre for writers (yig-mkhan zab-shar spur) is concerned: the body should be
wrapped in various silks, a pen and paper should be placed in the hands, and an ink pot and a book set in front. Whoever escorts the corpse
to the cremation, it will be auspicious. In this way, the funeral pyre of a writer will enhance the lineage of writers.
As far as the appropriate funeral for the corpse of a mason or carpenter (rkos-mkhan shing-bzo'i ro) is concerned: an
axe and a saw should be placed in the hands, and a measuring thread and a plank of wood placed in front. The corpse should then be taken
to a wide open place. In this way, the funeral of a craftsman will enhance the lineage of craftsmen.
Lastly, as far as the appropriate funeral for the corpse of a tailor or cobbler (gos-bzo lham-bzo'i ro) is concerned: a
leather-cutting knife, a needle and an awl should be placed in the hands, and a shoe-horn (thur-ma) and wooden shoe-tree (rgyang-shing)
set in front, and the corpse should be buried in a spacious location. In this way, the funeral appropriate for a tailor or cobbler will enhance
the lineage of tailors and cobblers.
Below Detail of Plate 13, fig. 2 (see p. 344), showing the appropriate
pyres for mantrins and Bon priests
30



344
The White Beryl
འམངའ་བདག་རྒྱལ་པོའི་སྤྱ༣ ཆབ་སྲིད་བློན་པོའི་སར།་
མཁས་བཙུན་པནྟི་ཏའི་སྤུར། ཉན་ཐོས་བཙུན་པའི་སར།།
སྔགས་པ་མཐུ་ཆེན་སྦྱར། གཤེན་རབ་བོན་གྱི་སྤུར།
WHITE
Plate 13, fig. 2
ཡེ་མཁྱེན་རྩིས་
འཚོ་བྱེད་སྨན་པའི་སྤུལྷ་བཟོ་བྲིས་ལུགས་
Wat espaganat FV BacÄTARAVARTHAT
JAIN
ས37)
Q
1998
As for the appropriate As for the appropriate As for the corpse of
As for the corpse of
funeral pyre for
artists (Iha-bzo
bris-lugs spur)
funeral pyre for
writers (yig-mkhan
zab-shar spur)
a mason or carpenter
(rkos-mkhan shing-
bzo'i ro)
a tailor or cobbler
(gos-bzo lham-bzo
'j ro)
Plate 13, fig. 2 (Ms l: ff.54–58): Predictions concerning the accoutrements of the corpse and the funeral procession (ro-chas-dang ro-rdzongs) for the most important and auspicious of all corpses (White Beryl, ff. 367a-375a)
As for the appropriate As for the appropriate As for the appropriate As for the appropriate As for the appropriate As for the appropriate As for the appropriate As for the appropriate
funeral pyre for kings funeral pyre for funeral pyre for funeral pyre for funeral pyre for funeral pyre for funeral pyre for funeral pyre for
(mnga'-bdag rgyal- ministers (chab-srid learned and venerable venerable pious powerful mantrins adherents of the astrologers
physicians
po'i spur)
blon-po'i spur) scholars (mkhas attendants (nyan-thos (sngags-pa mthu gShen-rab Bon (ye-mkhyen rtsis ('tsho-byed sman-
btsun pandita'i spur) btsun-pa'i spur) -chen spur)
tradition (gshen-rab mkhan spur) pa'i spur)
bon-po'i spur)
the corpse should be the corpse may be an excellent crematorium an excellent crematorium a crematorium should be a coffin of slate should be an excellent crematorium the corpse should be
adorned with fine silk cremated or interred. should be built, and before should be built, the corpse constructed within the constructed within a temple should be constructed anointed with fragrant
and ornaments of gold, If instead it is entombed, it a mandala-offering of should be wrapped in a hermitage, and the corpse on a rocky mountain, and in a place resembling medicines, a lancet and
silver, copper, iron and four arrows should be scented oils and flower religious robe (chos-gos) should be placed upon a the corpse, wrapped in a divination turtle, and medicine bottle (par-bu)
gemstones, and then wrapped in silk and bouquets should be and cremated on a pyre throne supported by lotus, blue silk of five types, below it the sequence of should be placed in the
not cremated
planted in the four arrayed. The corpse should of pinewood, while sun and moon cushions, should be placed on a seat, the elements should be hands, and various
the body should be
the body should be
an axe and a saw should
wrapped in white silk, a
wrapped in various silks,
be placed in the hands,
a leather-cutting knife,
needle and awl should be
placed in the hands, while
a shoe-horn and wooden
brush and pen placed in
the hands, and canvas,
paper, and paint pots set
a pen and paper should
be placed in the hands,
and an ink pot and a book
while a measuring thread
and a plank of wood are
placed in front. The
shoetree are set in front,
in front. Then the corpse
set in front. Whoever
corpse should then be
and the corpse should
but entombed.
directions, and the
be wrapped in fine silk,
extensive offerings
wrapped in the deceased's inscribed with the svāstika inscribed. In front, offer-
medicinal substances
should be placed within a
escorts the corpse to
taken to a wide open place. be buried in a spacious
and then cremated on
should be made. The
placed in front, while
the cremation, it will
location.
corpse should be
surrounded with many
slate tomb in an excellent
rocky mountain location.
a pyre of sandalwood or
bone relics should be
be auspicious.
sorts of grain.
juniper, while extensive
offerings should be made.
made into votive terracotta
images (satstsha) and
own mantra robes motif, while a drum and
(sngags-gos), and inserted cloche (shang) should be
within a wooden coffin placed in the hands. In
with the legs crossed and front a divine arrow with
the hands holding a rosary a white feather, adorned
ings, gtor-ma offerings,
and divinatory hidden
charts (gab-tshe) should
be arrayed, and various
grains placed. A turban
the body should be
wrapped in blue silk,
and positioned beside
a medicinal tree.
After the bone relics have
placed inside a stūpa
formed, they should be
as an object of veneration. and a ritual dagger (kila),
with five colours of silk
of five colours should be
set within a stūpa of
while in front a red gtor-
should be placed, along
fastened to the head,
gemstones, wrapped
and an arrow and cane
in silk of five colours,
ma offering symbolic of with the first fruits of a
human flesh (dmar-chen) wine-offering. Incense
is arrayed, and mounds and aromatic woods
placed in the hands,
and then placed in the
while the body should be
uppermost storey of the
of mustard seeds are
should be added, a wreath
anointed with the six
temple as perpetual
piled around. The corpse
of white hair (bal-thod
excellent medicinal
objects of veneration.
is then cremated on a pyre should be fastened to
substances (rtsi-sman
of incense and
the head, and around it
bzang drug).
frankincense.
grains and wood should
be placed
Generally speaking, when this mode of divination is employed, fourteen resultant pebbles are utilised, along with 177 pebbles of symbolic
recognition.77



345
Divinations of death
10. Predictions concerning the recurrence of death
(zlos-pa, White Beryl, ff. 375a-381a)
The examination of whether there will or will not be recurring deaths (ro zlos-pa), consequent on a specific death, is determined on the
basis of the ‘even- and odd-numbered pebbles of recurrence' (ra-bse'i zlos-rdel). Ten basic pebbles are assigned as black or white, corre-
sponding to the year, log-men, month, day, hour, planet, constellation, sectors of growth and decline, numeric square and trigram of the
deceased, along with one representing the conclusive analysis, as illustrated in exemplary chart 9.8.78
Black pebbles, representing the even-numbered concidences, suggest that ritual charms (gto) of the white, black
or variegated variety should be offered, and each of these has its distinct potency. Lo-chen Dharmaśrī, for whom this is the seventh cate-
gory, offers the following summary (Moonbeams, f. 36b):
The sectors of growth and decline, the month, the day, the hour,
The seventh category concerns the recurrence of corpses
[Divined on the basis) of even- and odd-numbered (pebbles). 79
Eleven distinct pebbles are employed,
The planet, and the constellation.
These indicate whether a recurrence (of death] will take place or not,
And which living (relatives) are susceptible to this recurrence.
Representing the present year (of the death),
Along with the log-men, the numeric square, the trigram,
9.8 Exemplary chart
odd- and even-numbered years of death
odd- and even-numbered log-menyears
odd- and even-numbered months of death
odd- and even-numbered days of death
odd- and even-numbered hours of death
odd- and even-numbered planets of death
In particular, when the predicted outcome, symbolised by black pebbles, suggests such a recurrence of death, rituals should be under-
taken to examine whether any of the eight great irritations ('grams-chen rnam-brgyad), and the concomitant lesser irritations ('grams-
phran), are present or not. 80 The former, which are all illustrated on Plate 13, figs 3–13, comprise: the innermost irritation associated
with malevolent forces (bdud-kyi khog-'grams), the heart-like irritation associated with Dva and Zin (dva-zin-gyi snying-'grams), the irrita-
tion associated with the multiples of nine (dgu-mig grangs-'grams), the irritation associated with the ill-health, death and tomb sectors
(na-shi dur-'grams), the irritation consequent on the spirit Kung-kung (kung-kung-gi rjes-'grams), the negative irritations associated with
the four iron years and eight fire years (lcags-bzhi me-brgyad-kyi ngan-'grams), the negative irritations associated with the planets and
constellations (gza'-skar ngan-'grams), and the consequential irritations of defective actions (bya-ba nyes-pa'i rkyen-'grams).
As far as the first of these, the innermost irritation associated with malevolent forces (bdud-kyi khog-'grams; Plate
13, fig. 3), is concerned: if the year, month, day or hour of death coincides with a trigram corresponding to its own constitutional type, as
when the horse or snake sign coincides with the trigram Li, the sheep sign with the trigram Khon, and so forth, this is the innermost irri-
tation among the eight great irritations. If the ending of the family line which this may provoke is not averted, another corpse may be car-
ried off by a hostile year-sign on a day or hour coincident with a hostile trigram. It will help if the funeral of an enemy is confined to the
direction of the enemy.
odd- and even-numbered constellations of death
odd- and even-numbered numeric squares of death
odd- and even-numbered trigrams of death
odd- and even-numbered sectors of growth and decline
pebble of conclusive analysis
LOV
གཤིན་པོའི་ལ།
Muce
SALn49
ཐེབས་ར།
agདལོ་རྟ་འདི་རྣམས་
**NARI'.***
བཞིན་བདུན་གྱི་ ་
Plate 13, fig. 3
ཁོག་ལ་འགྲམས།
Plate 13. fig. 3 (Ms 1: ff.54–58): Predictions concerning the recurrence of death: The innermost irritation associated with malevolent forces (zlos-pa las bdud-kyi khog-'grams; White Beryl, ff. 375a-381a)
When the year of the
horse or snake
sheep
bird or monkey
dog
mouse or pig
ox
tiger or hare
dragon
deceased's death is as
follows (gshin-po'i lo)
and the current trigram of
death is as follows
Li
Khon
Dva
Khen
Kham
GinZin
Zon
(rbabs-spar)
the innermost irritation associated with malevolent forces may arise when death coincides with these year-signs and trigrams
(lo-tags 'di-nams spar-kha 'di-nams-la shi-na bdud-kyi khog-pa 'grams)
Secondly, as for the heart-like irritation associated with Dva and Zin (dva-zin-gyi snying-'grams; Plate 13, fig. 4): if death coincides with
the trigram Dva and the year-, month-, day- or hour-sign is that of the bird or monkey, it will be inauspicious for the most important rel-
atives of the deceased, for which reason it resembles the heart. However, if death coincides with the trigram Dva and some other year-
sign, the portent is more benign, and is described as an ‘ancillary irritation of the heart' (snying-gi yan-lag'grams). If death coincides with
the trigram Zin and the bird, monkey, or one of the adversarial signs, the portent is equal to that of the heart-like irritation, but if it coin-
cides with Zin and the tiger or hare year-sign, and so forth, the outcome is more benign.



346
The White Beryl
Plate 13, fig. 4 (Ms 1: f. 58): Predictions concerning the recurrence of death: The heart-like irritation associated with Dva and Zin (sa-dpyad bcu-pa zlos-pa las dva-zin-gyi snying-grams, White Beryl, ff. 375a-381a)
Zin
Dva
bird or monkey
bird or monkey
the heart-like irritation may arise when death coincides with these trigrams and the bird or monkey year, month, day or hour
(spar-kha 'di gnyis lo-zla zhag-dus bya-sprer shi-na snying 'grams)
སར་ཁ་འདི་གཉིས་ལོ་ཟླ་བ་ཞག་དུས་བྱ་སྐྱེ་
་ན་སང་འགྲམས
Plate 13, fig. 4
Thirdly, as for the irritation associated with the multiples of nine (dgu-mig grangs-'grams; Plate 13, fig. 5): irritations are also provoked by
the coincidence of death with the multiples of nine, i.e. at the ages nine, eighteen, twenty-seven, thirty-six, forty-five, fifty-four, sixty-
three, seventy-two and eighty-one. For example, when the death of a man or woman coincides with the trigram Li or Kham and the first
multiple of nine, i.e. at the age of nine, it will be the harbinger of four to eight other deaths. The specified remedial rites should therefore
be undertaken. When it coincides with the trigram Khen or Khon and the second multiple of nine, i.e. at the age of eighteen, it will be
harmful for seven persons, and the death of elderly persons will be provoked by that of a young girl, for which reason no funeral cere-
mony should be undertaken for three years. When it coincides with the trigram Dva and the third multiple of nine, i.e. at the age of
twenty-seven, it will resemble the heart and portends harm to five persons, for which reason specified rites should be carried out. When it
coincides with the trigrams Khen or Khon, and the fourth multiple of nine, i.e. at the age of thirty-six, death will, it is said, be repeated
four or eight times, and these will be provoked by the death of an old lady; for this reason the corpse should not face upwards but should
instead be buried or cremated, facing east, with the marks of the crossed-vajra on the soles of the feet, and so forth. When it coincides with
the trigrams Kham or Li, and the fifth multiple of nine, i.e. at the age of forty-five, it may be inauspicious for three, five or eleven persons,
and the deaths of old people will be provoked by the death of a small boy, for which reason no funeral ceremony should be undertaken for
three years. When it coincides with the trigrams Gin or Zon, and the sixth multiple of nine, i.e. at the age of fifty-four, twelve persons
may die, and these will be provoked by the death of an older girl or boy, for which reason specified rituals should be undertaken. When it
coincides with the trigram Dva or Zin, and the seventh multiple of nine, i.e. at the age of sixty-three, three or seven persons may die a
harsh death, and these will be provoked by the death of an adult male, for which reason the corpse should be placed in a coffin made by a
mantrin. When it coincides with the trigram Gin or Zon, and the eighth multiple of nine, i.e. at the age of seventy-two, it will be harsh for
four, eight or twelve persons, and these will be provoked by the death of a son who brings the family line to an end, for which reason the
corpse should also be placed in a coffin made by a mantrin. Lastly, when it coincides with the trigram Li or Kham and the ninth multiple of
nine, i.e. at the age of eighty-one, nine persons may die, for which reason diverse rites are prescribed.
Plate 13, fig. 5
11
51
.
E
VOL 5 Non
སར་ལ་ཐོག་འདས་ནད་
དག་མག་ག་གོང ས་ ་ ་
ཟ་འགྲམས་པ་་ བ
When death occurs at the
When death occurs at the
When death occurs at the
Plate 13, fig. 5 (Ms I: ff. 54–58): Predictions concerning the recurrence of death: The irritation associated with the multiples of number nine (sa-dpyad bcu-pa zlos-pa las dgu-mig grangs-grams; White Beryl, ff. 375–381a)
When death occurs at
When death occurs at the When death occurs at the When death occurs at the When death occurs at the When death occurs at the
the age of nine
age of eighteen
age of twenty-seven
age of thirty-six
age of forty-five
age of fifty-four
coinciding with the
coinciding with the trigrams coinciding with the
coinciding with the trigrams coinciding with the trigrams coinciding with the trigrams
trigrams Li or Kham
Khen or Khon
trigram Dva
Khen or Khon
Kham or Li
Gin or Zon
age of sixty-three
age of seventy-two
coinciding with the trigrams
coinciding with the trigrams
age of eighty-one
coinciding with the trigrams
Li or Kham
Dva or Zin
Gin or Zon
the irritation associated with the multiples of nine may arise when death of a man or woman coincides with these year-signs and trigrams (pho-mo lo spar-li-thog 'das-na dgu-mig-gi grangs 'grams-pa yin)
Fourth, as for the irritation associated with the ill-health, death and tomb sectors (na-shi dur-'grams; Plate 13, fig. 6): irritation may arise
coinciding with death on one or other of the so-called ‘days of the tomb' (dur-gyi nyi-ma). 81 During the four first seasonal months of the
tiger, monkey, pig and snake, this coincides with the sixth day of the lunar month. During the four mid-seasonal months of the mouse,
horse, bird and hare, it coincides with the sixteenth day, and during the four last seasonal months of the ox, dragon, sheep and dog it coin-
cides with the twenty-sixth day.
Plate 13, fig. 6
ཤ་ཟླ།
ཆས་གྲངས།
23
༄༅།
ཟླ་བ་འདི་རྣམས་ཀྱི་ཚེས་འདིར་ཤི་
ན་དུར་འགྲམས།
Plate 13, fig. 6 (Msi:ff. 54–55): Predictions concerning the recurrence of death: The irritation associated with the sectors of ill-health, death and tomb (sa-dpyad bcu-pa zlos-pa las na-shi-dur 'grams, White Beryl, ff. 375a-381a)
When the month of death is as follows (shi-zla)
tiger, monkey, mouse, horse, ox, sheep,
pig or snake bird or hare dog or dragon
and the date of death is the following day of the tomb' (tshes-grangs) 6th
16th
26th
the irritation associated with the sectors of ill-health, death and tomb may arise when death occurs on these dates in
those particular calendar months (zla-ba 'di-rnams-kyi tshes 'dir shi-na dur 'grams)
Now, the diverse relationships formed by the coincidence of the deceased's vitality, body, destiny, luck and life-spirit (bla) elements with
the signs of the death year, month, day and hour suggest the presence of the equally diverse irritations associated with the ill-health,
death and tomb sectors, as illustrated in exemplary chart 9.9 from Bai-dkar bu-yig gshin-rtsis khra-ma'i dper-brjod gnad-bsdus. 82



347
Divinations of death
9.9 Exemplary chart
Deceased's vitality element
year of death
0
month of death
x
day of death
O
hour of death
X
identity-relationship
mother-relationship
son-relationship
0
0
friend-relationship
enemy-relationship
deceased's body element
X
day of death
0
hour of death
year of death
month of death
c
identity-relationship
mother-relationship
son-relationship
0
0
0
0
friend-relationship
year of death
X
month of death
0
day of death
X
hour of death
0
enemy-relationship
deceased's destiny element
identity-relationship
mother-relationship
son-relationship
friend-relationship
X
0
X
X
X
0
enemy-relationship
year of death
month of death
day of death
deceased's luck element
identity-relationship
hour of death
0
0
X
mother-relationship
son-relationship
friend-relationship
O
enemy-relationship
year of death
month of death
day of death
hour of death
deceased's life-spirit (bla) element
identity-relationship
mother-relationship
son-relationship
friend-relationship
X
0
0
0
X
0
X
0
0
0
X
0
enemy-relationship
The corresponding portents are depicted on Plate 13, fig. 7. For example, when the sign of death coincides with all these three sectors,
forming an identity-relationship with the deceased's vitality element, it is inauspicious for paternal and elderly relatives. When it forms a
mother-relationship with the deceased's vitality element it is inauspicious for grandchildren and widows; while a similar son-relationship
portends ill-fortune for astrologers or diviners, an enemy-relationship for horses and cattle, and a friend-relationship for horses and don-
keys. When the sign of death coincides with all these three sectors, forming an identity-relationship with the deceased's body element, it is
inauspicious for children and servants; when it forms a mother-relationship it is inauspicious for widows; while a similar son-relationship
portends ill-fortune for daughters, a friend-relationship for adult males, and an enemy-relationship for widows. When the sign of death
coincides with all these three sectors, forming an identity-relationship with the deceased's destiny element, there will be destruction of
property, and losses; when it forms a mother-relationship there will be destruction of property; while a similar son-relationship portends
ill-fortune for cooked food, a friend-relationship for cattle and servants, and an enemy-relationship is deemed auspicious. When the sign
of death coincides with all these three sectors, forming an identity-relationship with the deceased's luck element, it will be inauspicious for
the funeral; when it forms a mother-relationship, it will be inauspicious for the Bon funerary priests (dur-bon); while a similar son-relation-
ship portends ill-fortune for grandchildren and widows, a friend-relationship for wives, and an enemy-relationship for friends. Finally,
when the sign of death coincides with all these three sectors, forming an identity-relationship with the deceased's life-spirit element, it
will be inauspicious for neighbours; when it forms a mother-relationship, it will be inauspicious for bar-girls;89 while a similar son-rela-
tionship portends ill-fortune for illegitimate children, a friend-relationship for wealth, and an enemy-relationship for enemies.
Plate 13, fig. 7
སྲོག་ལུས་དབང་ཀླུང་
བླའི་ཁམས།
ཞི་བའི་ལོ་ཟླ་ཞག་དུས་ཀྱི་
ནཤེ་དུར་གྱི་ ལ་རྟ༑་
༄༅་སྲོག་ལུས་དབང་
ཀླུང་བློ་རང་མ་བུ་དགྲ་གྲོགས་ཀྱི་ན་ཤི་དུར་གྱི་
འགྲམས་ཀྱི་གབ་རྩེ།།
tiger
Plate 13, fig. 7 (Ms l: ff. 56-58): Predictions concerning the recurrence of death: The irritation associated with the sectors of ill-health, death and tomb, continued (sa-dpyad bcu-pa zlos-pa las na-shi-dur 'grams; White Beryl, ff. 375–381a)
Irritation may arise when any of these elements of the deceased's vitality, body, destiny, luck or life-spirit (srog-lus dbang-klung bla'i khams)
wood
fire
earth
water
iron
forms one of the five relationships with any of the following year, month, day or hour signs of death, in association with the three
snake horse sheep monkey bird dog
hare dragon pig mouse ox
sectors of ill-health, death and tomb (shi-ba'i lo-zla zhag-dus-kyi na-shi dur-gyi lo-rtags)
Divination chart showing the irritation associated with the sectors of ill-health, death and tomb when these are in an identity-, mother-, son-, enemy- or friend-relationship with the deceased's vitality, body, destiny, luck or life-spirit (srog-lus dbang-klung bla rang ma-bu dgra-grogs-kyi
na-shi dur-gyi 'grams-kyi gab-rtse)



348
The White Beryl
Fifth, as for the irritation consequent on the spirit Kung-kung (kung-kung-gi rjes-'grams; Plate 13, fig. 8): when the death of someone
born under one of the four adversarial year-signs (ox, dragon, sheep or dog) also coincides with one of these four signs and the
trigram Khen, the spirit Kung-kung will bring bad auspices to posterity (kung-kung rjes-ngan), and particularly for four
persons. Similarly, when the death of someone born under one of the four adversarial year-signs also coincides with one of these
four year- and month-signs and the trigram Gin, Kung-kung will cause irritations for posterity (kung-kung rjes-'grams), and it will be
particularly inauspicious for the male line, provoking the deaths of a bride and three sons. When the death of someone born under one
of the four adversarial year-signs also coincides with one of these four year- and month-signs and the trigram Khon, Kung-kung
will induce funerals (kung-kung dur-len), and these will be provoked particularly by the death of a bride or of three sons. Then, when
the death of someone born under one of the four adversarial year-signs also coincides with one of these four year- and month-signs
and the trigram Zon, Kung-kung will cause the funeral to have an inverse impact for posterity (kung-kung dur-log), since the death of
a father will provoke that of a brother or sister.
ལོ་འདི་དག་ལོ་ཟླ་ཞག་དུས་འདི་ཐོག་ཤི།
|
སྤར་ཁ་འདི་ཐོག་ཤི།
འགམས་མང༌།
གུང་ཀུང་རྗེས་ངན།
ཀུང་ཀུང་རྗེས་འགྲམས།
ཀུང་ཀུང་དུར་ལེན།
ཀུང་ཀུང་དུར་ལག།
Plate 13, fig. 8
Plate 13, fig. 8 (Ms l: ff. 54–58): Predictions concerning the recurrence of death: The irritation consequent on the spirit Kung-kung (zlos-pa las kung-kung-gi rjes-'grams; White Beryl, ff. 375a-381a)
When the death of one born
ox, sheep, dog or dragon
ox, sheep, dog or dragon
ox, sheep, dog or dragon
ox, sheep, dog or dragon
under one of the following signs
coincides with the sign of the
same year, month, day or hour
(lo 'di-dag lo-zla zhag-dus
'di-thog shi)
and the death also coincides Khen
Gin
Khon
Zon
with the following trigram
(spar-kha 'di-thog shi)
the following type of irritation Kung-kung will bring bad auspices to Kung-kung will cause irritations Kung-kung will induce funerals
Kung-kung will cause the funeral to have
may arise ('grams-ming)
posterity (kung-kung rjes-ngan), for posterity (kung-kung rjes-
(kung-kung dur-len), and these
an inverse impact for posterity (kung-kung
particularly for four persons.
'grams), and it will be particularly will be provoked particularly by the dur-log), exemplified by the death of a
inauspicious for the male line,
death of a bride or of three sons. father provoking that of a brother or sister.
provoking the deaths of a
ONS
bride and three sons.
Sixth, as for the negative irritations associated with the four iron years and eight fire years (lcags-bzhi me-brgyad-kyi ngan-'grams; Plate
13, fig. 9): if the year-sign of the deceased is one of the four iron or eight fire years which are deemed inauspicious,84 and the year of the
death and the log-men year are also of these categories, there is a triple conjunction, indicating that unfortunate consequences will imme-
diately arise.
ཤིན་པོ་ལ་ཧ་གི་བའི་གནམ་ལོ་ ལོག་མེན་འདིར་
ཕྱིནན་ལེ་ངན་ལྕགས་བཞི་མེ་བརྒྱད་འགྲིམས།།
Plate 13, fig. 9
Plate 13, fig. 9 (Ms 1: ff. 54–58): Predictions concerning the recurrence of death: The negative irritations associated with the four iron years and eight fire years (zlos-pa las Icags-bzhi me-brgyad-kyi ngan-'grams; White Beryl, ff. 375a–381a)
The irritation associated with the following four negative iron years
iron mouse
iron ox
iron pig
iron dog
fire tiger
fire hare
fire dragon
fire snake
fire horse
fire sheep
f ire monkey
fire bird
and eight fire years may arise when the year-sign of the deceased,
as well as the present year of death and the log-men year, are all of
this category (gshin-po lo-rtags/ shi-ba'i gnam-lol
og-men 'dir phyin-na lo-ngan Icags-bzhi me-brgyad 'grams)
Seventh, as for the negative irritations associated with the planets and constellations (gza'-skar ngan-'grams; Plate 13, fig. 10): the plan-
ets are said to be inauspicious if they are in a sector of decline at the time of death. If Mercury, Jupiter and Venus are in a sector of
growth, there will be no irritation, but the Sun, Moon and Mars are invariably inauspicious, although slightly more benign if they are in
a sector of growth. Now, these irritations are present when the death of a person with a wood constitutional type coincides with
Venus and the six western constellations (37–45), when a fire constitutional type coincides with the Moon or Mercury and the six
northern constellations (49–57), when an earth constitutional type coincides with Jupiter and the six eastern constellations (13–21),
when an iron constitutional type coincides with the Sun, Mars and the six southern constellations (25–33), or when a water
constitutional type coincides with Saturn and the four intermediate constellations: Aśleşā (skag), Viśākhā (sa-ga), Śravaņā (byi-zhin)
and Bharaṇī (bra-nye).



349
Divinations of death
རུས་ཁམས།
དགྲ་གཟའ་དགྲ་སྐར།
LANSAAT
བྱང་སྐར།
ཤར་མར།
O
སོགས་ག།
བྱིན བྲ་ཉེ།
Plate 13, fig. 10
Plate 13, fig. 10 (Ms l: ff. 54-57): Predictions concerning the recurrence of death: The negative irritations associated with the planets and constellations
fire
earth
iron
water
(zlos-pa las gza'-skar ngan-'grams; White Beryl, ff. 375a-381a)
Irritation may arise when wood
the death of a person with
the following constitutional
type (rus-khams)
coincides with the following Venus and the six western
planets and constellations in constellations (nub-skar)
an enemy-relationship
Jupiter and the six eastern
Sun or Mars, and the six southern
Saturn and one of the four
Moon or Mercury, and the six
northern constellations
constellations (shar-skar)
constellations (Iho-skar)
intermediate constellations:
(byang-skan
(dgra-gza' dgra-skar)
Aśleşā (skag), Višākhā
(sa-ga), Śravaņā (byi-zhin)
and Bharani (bra-nye)
@ 2s
སྐར་མགོ་བཞི་ཟློས།
Plate13, fig. 11
Eighth, as for the consequential irritations of defective actions (bya-ba nyes-pa'i rkyen-'grams; Plate 13, figs 11-13): if the appropriate
funeral procedures are not carried out, it augurs ill for the principal mourners. However, there are ritual means of repairing irritations
due to former defective funeral rites, those due to recently defective funeral rites, and so forth. Briefly, one should examine whether there
are serious diseases or demonic irritations, and the like, and apply the appropriate ritual remedy. In general, it is said that the death of a
father in an adversarial year is inauspicious for elderly paternal relatives, the death of a mother in an adversarial month is inauspicious for
elderly maternal relatives, the death of a son on an adversarial day is inauspicious for young males, and the death of a grandchild at an
adversarial hour is inauspicious for small children.
If a death coincides with one of the four initial constellations (skar-'go bzhi),85 which happens to form an enemy or
adversarial relationship, death it is said will recur (Plate 13, fig. 11). Such recurrence of death will generally coincide with the trigrams
Dva, Zin, Khon or Kham (Plate 13, fig. 12), or with the numeric squares Black Two and Red Seven (Plate 13, fig. 13). Specific predictions
and rites are given for deaths occurring in diverse years, months, days and hours.
སླར་ཁ་འདི་དག་ལབ་ན་ཟློས། དོ་གཅིག་མ་ཀླུངས་
ལ་ཟླ་ཞག་དུས་འདོམས་པ་ཟློས།
Plate 13, fig. 11 (Ms l: f.58): Predictions concerning the recurrence of death: Irritations consequent on defective actions (zlos-pa las bya-ba nyes-pa'i rkyen-'grams; White Beryl, ff. 375a-381a)
Plate 13, fig. 12
The second constellation, Krttikā (smin-drug) The ninth constellation, Maghā (mchu)
The sixteenth constellation, Anuradha (Iha-mtshams) The twenty-second constellation, Dhanasta (mon-gre)
If a death coincides with one of these four initial constellations, which happens to form an enemy or adversarial relationship, there may be a recurrence of death (skar-'go bzhi zlos)
Plate 13, fig. 12 (Ms 1: f. 54): Predictions concerning the recurrence of death: Irritations consequent on defective actions, continued (zlos-pa las bya-ba nyes-pa'i rkyen-'grams; White Beryl, ff. 3752–381a)
Dva
Zin
Khon
Kham
སྨེ་བ་འདིར་ཤི་ན་ཟློས།
Recurrence of death may generally arise when a death coincides with one of these trigrams, and recurrence of death
may arise when the year, month, day and hour indicative of the mother's luck aspect all coincide
(spar-kha 'di-dag-la shi-na zlosl do-gcig ma-klungs lo-zla zhag-dus 'doms-pa zlos)
Plate 13, fig. 13
Plate, 13, fig. 13 (Ms I:f.55): Predictions concerning the recurrence of death: Irritations consequent on defective actions, continued (zlos-pa las bya-ba nyes-pa'i rkyen-'grams; White Beryl, ff. 375a-381a)
Black 2
Red 7
Recurrence of death may generally arise when death coincides
with one of these numeric squares (sme-ba 'dir shi-na zlos)
11. Predictions concerning the eye of death
(shi-mig, White Beryl, f. 381a/b)
The so-called 'eye of death' (shi-mig) may be divined in diverse ways, corresponding to the object of the divination. It is determined on the
basis of the vitality element for proprietors, or heads of the household, and monks, on the basis of the body element for paternal relatives,
on the basis of the destiny element for aunts and female cooks (zan-ma), on the basis of the luck element for maternal uncles and princes,
on the basis of the constitutional type for kings, on the basis of the present year for soothsayers, on the basis of the month for ministers,
on the basis of the day for soldiers, on the basis of the hour for butchers or armed foes (sha-ba star-thogs), on the basis of the planet for
spouses, on the basis of the constellation for neighbours, on the basis of the numeric squares for widows and orphans, and on the basis of
the trigrams for all in general.86
In particular, when an examination is made on the basis of the deceased's vitality or destiny element, the eye of
death' points towards the living relatives who share the same year-sign, or those with a year in a seventh-removed aspect (bdun-zur), a pre-
ceding fourth-removed adversarial aspect (yar-bzhi) or a following fifth-removed aspect (mar-gyi lnga), as illustrated on Plate 13, fig. 14.
For example, if the deceased's year-sign is that of the mouse, the eye of death will look towards living relatives
with the mouse, horse, pig or dragon signs. If the deceased's year-sign is that of the ox, the eye of death will look towards living relatives
with the ox, sheep, dog or snake signs. If the deceased's year-sign is that of the tiger, the eye of death will look towards living relatives
with the tiger, monkey, pig or horse signs. If the deceased's year-sign is that of the hare, the eye of death will look towards living relatives
with the hare, bird, mouse or sheep signs. If the deceased's year-sign is that of the dragon, the eye of death will look towards living rela-
tives with the dragon, dog, ox or monkey signs. If the deceased's year-sign is that of the snake, the eye of death will look towards living
relatives with the snake, pig, tiger or bird signs. If the deceased's year-sign is that of the horse, the eye of death will look towards living
relatives with the horse, mouse, hare or tiger signs. If the deceased's year-sign is that of the sheep, the eye of death will look towards



350
The White Beryl
living relatives with the sheep, ox, dragon or pig signs. If the deceased's year-sign is that of the monkey, the eye of death will look
towards living relatives with the monkey, tiger, snake or mouse signs. If the deceased's year-sign is that of the bird, the eye of death will
look towards living relatives with the bird, hare, horse or ox signs. If the deceased's year-sign is that of the dog, the eye of death will look
towards living relatives with the dog, dragon, sheep or tiger signs. Lastly, if the deceased's year-sign is that of the pig, the eye of death
will look towards living relatives with the pig, snake, monkey or hare signs.
Plate 13, fig. 14
གཤེན་རྒྱ་ལ། །
ཤ་མག་གསོན་
ལ་བལྟ་ལགས།
༩
གཤིན་གྱི་ལེ།
re
(Occord
རྣམག་གསན་
ལ་བལྟ་ལུགས།
གཤིན་གྱི་ལེ།
ཐ་མག་གསེན་
ལ་བལྟ་ལུགས།
)
z
གཞིན་གྱི་ལེ།
AN
ཞིག་ནན་
ལ་བ་ལགས།
OX
snake
horse
sheep
monkey
bird
dog
pig
horse, mouse,
sheep, ox,
monkey, tiger,
bird, hare,
dog, dragon,
pig, snake,
Plate 13, fig. 14, (Ms I:ff. 54–55): Predictions concerning the eye of death' made on the basis of the deceased's vitality or destiny element (shi-mig, White Beryl, f. 381a/b)
When the deceased's year-sign is the
mouse
tiger
hare
dragon
following (gshin-gyi lo)
the 'eye of death' points towards living mouse, horse, ox, sheep, dog tiger, monkey, hare, bird,
dragon, dog,
relatives with the following identical, bird or dragon or snake
pig or horse mouse or sheep ox or monkey
seventh-removed (bdun-zur), preceding
fourth-removed adversarial (yar-bzhi)
or following fifth-removed (mar-gyi Inga)
year-signs (shi-mig gson-la blta-lugs)
snake, pig,
tiger or bird
oxor
hare or tiger
dragon or pig
snake or mouse
horse or ox
sheep or tiger
monkey or hare



351
Divinations of death
Locus
The connection between the dead and the living is also said to be manifest when they share the same trigram and numeric square, as illus-
trated on Plate 13, fig. 15. In such cases, one should persevere with the counteractive ritual means and good-luck charms.
ནི་གསོན་སྤར་སྨེ་ གརན་ས་་
་གཅིག་པར་བལྷ།།
Plate 13, fig. 15 (Ms I: ff. 54–55): Predictions concerning the 'eye of death' (shi-mig) made on the basis of the deceased and living relatives sharing the same trigram and numeric square (White Beryl, f. 381a/b)
Li, Khon, Dva, Khen,
White 1, Black 2, Blue 3, Green 4,
Kham, Gin, Zin, Zon
Yellow 5, White 6, Red 7, White 8, Red 9
The dead also look upon the living when they share the same trigram and numeric
square (shi-gson spar-sme gdan-sa gcig-par blta)
Plate 13, fig. 15
According to White Beryl, this mode of divination altogether employs thirty-nine resultant pebbles and fifty-five symbolic pebbles of
recognition.87 Lo-chen Dharmaśrī, however, emphasises one aspect of this calculation, utilising a distinctive numeric permutation and
placement of residual pebbles (rde'u ro) which is reminiscent of that already described in the discussion of rGya-nag rdel-skor.88 Here,
only the vitality element of the month of death is contrasted with the five aspects of the deceased's vitality, body, destiny and luck ele-
ments, and then all the deployed pebbles are permutated or interchanged in a particular sequence except those representing the son-rela-
tionships. Schematic chart 9.10 shows the interchanged pebbles by number.
9.10 Permutations of pebbles in the calculation of the 'eye of death'
Deceased's luck element
Deceased's vitality element
identity mother
159 2-10
son
3
enemy
4-6
friend
5-7
Deceased's body element
identity mother
6-4 7-5
son
8
enemy
9–1
friend
10-
Deceased's destiny element
identity mother
11-19 12-20
son
13
enemy
14-16
friend
15-17
identity
16->14
mother
1715
son
18
enemy
19->11
friend
20-12
Vitality element of the
month of death
The pebbles are then rearranged within a grid to indicate the categories of relative at risk due to the ‘eye of death”. In this context, the
four columns of the vertical axis refer respectively to paternal relatives, maternal relatives, in-laws or grandchildren or widowed per-
sons, and patrons. The five rows of the horizontal axis refer respectively to the aged, adult males, adult females, children and servants.
Finally, any residual pebbles (rdel-ro) should be examined. If there are none it will be auspicious. Otherwise there is a procedure for sub-
stituting inauspicious residual pebbles with harmonious pebbles so as to avoid certain negative outcomes. Exemplary chart 9.11, derived
from Bai-dkar bu-yig gshin-rtsis khra-ma'i dper-brjod gnad-bsdus,89 represents the rearranged pebbles.
9.11 Exemplary chart
Vitality element of the month of death
deceased's vitality
deceased's body
deceased's destiny
deceased's luck
element = paternal
element = maternal
element = sons-in-law,
element = patrons
relatives
relatives
grandchildren or
widowed relatives
XX
XX
1
5
00
Identity-relationship = the aged
Mother-relationship = adult males
Son-relationship = adult females
Enemy-relationship = children
Friend-relationship = servants
Residual pebbles (rdel-ro)
0X
00
X
XX
...........
9 ox 4
10 00 5
3 X 8
X X 1
7
2
19
20
13
16
17
o
X
0x
0
6
X
x
12
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises this topic in the following verses (Moonbeams, ff. 38a–39a):
There is also the method of picking up and placing the residual
Then, as for the rearrangement of the pebbles on the vertical scale:
The one representing the friend-relationship of the vitality element
Should be interchanged with the pebble
pebbles 90
The first column is that of the father, paternal uncles, and brethren in
Which is included among (the divination techniques concerning]
Representing the mother-relationship of the body element.
order of seniority,
The emergence of (signs relevant to the living (relatives)
The one representing the mother-relationship of the vitality element
The second is that of the mother, maternal aunts and [maternal]
Based on calculations pertaining to the dead:9
Should be interchanged with the pebble
relatives,
The pebbles represent the successive contrasts
The third is that of sons-in-law, grandchildren and widowed
Between solely the vitality element of the month of death,
persons. 92
Representing the friend-relationship of the body element.
The one representing the mother-relationship of the destiny element
Should be interchanged with the pebble
Representing the friend-relationship of the luck element
The one representing the identity-relationship of the vitality element
And the deceased's vitality, body, destiny and luck,
Each being further subdivided according to the relationships
And the fourth is that of patrons. 93
On the horizontal scale, there are the successive rows,
Representing the aged, adult males, adult women, children
Of identity, mother, son, enemy and friend.
These should then be arranged distinctly in horizontal rows,
and servants, 94
Starting with the pebbles representing an identity-relationship.
Should be interchanged with the pebble
Representing the enemy-relationship of the body element;
And the one representing the identity-relationship of the destiny
Corresponding respectively to the relationships
Of identity, mother, son, and so forth.
Then, the pebbles should be rearranged in the following sequence:
element
The one representing the enemy-relationship of the vitality element
Should be interchanged with the pebble
Finally, any residual pebbles should be taken up:
Should be interchanged with the pebble
Representing the enemy-relationship of the luck element.
A white one should be taken up from among three black ones,
Representing the identity-relationship of the body element.
And a black one should be taken up from among three white ones.
The one representing the enemy-relationship of the destiny element
The four (pebbles) representing the son-relationships
[Of these four aspects) should not be interchanged,
But left in their original sectors.
The recurrence (of death), it is said, may impact upon
Someone with one of the three compatible year-signs.
Should be interchanged with the pebble
Representing the identity-relationship of the luck element.



Լաթ, 2
թ
|
ե
, -
։
է
նա ,* :
են:
։
Է, ՈՐ
*
The White Beryl
։
է
352
:
,,Հայր,
մրցակցին
ԱՏՆԵվ,-
«
Ը
։
Է ԴԱ
,
,
:
,,
,
.
է
,
Է:
*
*
*
.
ԵՒ
.
.
:
Է
,
,
: է
:
*
,, ։ ԸՆՏԱՆ
Շ..
. Է ՆԱ: Ն
ՆԱ Ն :Ն ՀԱՆ:
ԻՆ, Ն
, ԲԱՐ
I
. : Հ։
* :
:
ՏՆԻ,
1
* *
.
,
: հ
,
, Ն Ն Ե
Է
Ա
, 10
Ե
Է
.
10.
Է ՀԻՆ
«
:
նց,
Կոդ
է
Ա
Ր
ԷՅ»
.
-
.
*
.
I
ՀՀ է
5
-
Ի
ն
Ը՝ Ի
ԴՈՒ
Է
՝
Ա
,
Կլ
,
ԱԻՆ Է ,
/ԱՆ ՀԻԱՆԱ,
2015
Ե::
+" RSS
ԱՐՏՆԵՐԻ
սեր
Լ
'
'
,-
Եւ
*
.
ԻՆԱ
Մ
Ի
Ր
ԵՆ ՄԵԾ
Ա
Գ
:
(
ՀՀ
ԳՆԱ
-
|
է
ՏՐՆ Է
:
::
:
(
ԴԻՐՆ Է:
ՆԵՐ՝
4, ":»
:
.
.
էր:
,
.․
ՆԱ:
:
Ն։
:
:
,
7.
(
S
ան
Նա է
։
է
ՆԻ
Ի



353
Divinations of death
12. Predictions concerning the directions for corpse disposal
(gshin-po'i phung-po gtong-rim, White Beryl, ff. 381b-388b)
Following the dissolution of the five elements and sensory perceptions at the time of death, the outer and inner respirationº come to an
end, and the apparitions of the intermediate state arise. On this subject, there is no unanimity; the diverse philosophical schools of
Mahāyāna and Hīnayāna Buddhism, including the perspectives of the Four Classes of Tantra (rgyud-sde bzhi) and the Nine Vehicles (theg-
dgu), as well as their learned and accomplished Tibetan commentators, express different opinions on the period of time that conscious-
ness remains attached to the body following death.96
The synthesis presented by Sangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho, which is not contradicted by the canonical accounts, or by
the writings of Padmasambhava, Tsongkhapa, or Dalai Lama V, holds that the corpse of an accomplished meditation master should not
be disposed of until liberation has been fully attained at the time of death, whereas those of an educated or spiritually developed person
should be left intact for up to seven days, while those of ordinary persons should be left undisturbed for four days.97
Then, the following ten considerations should be made: the celestial chart (nam-mkha'i byi-lam), and the terres-
trial chart (sa'i byi-lam) with its nine aspects: the spirit lords of the soil governing the years, months, days and hours, along with the direc-
tional numeric squares and trigrams, the directional gates of the dead and the living, and the actual removal of the corpse.
Now, the celestial chart indicates that the corpse should be removed under an auspicious planet and constellation,
whereas the terrestrial chart, illustrated on Plate 13, fig. 16 (shown overleaf), indicates that the five tiger and five hare years are located
in the east, the five dragon years in the south-east, the five snake and horse years in the south, the five sheep years in the south-west, the
five monkey and bird years in the west, the five dog years in the north-west, the five pig and mouse years in the north, and the five ox
years in the north-east.
The positions of the various spirit lords of the soil must then be determined in relation to the sixty years of
the cycle.98 These include the seventeen main spirit lords of the years, namely: King The-se, Queen mother The-khyem, Queen Hang-
phan, the royal minister Tsang-kun, the royal upholsterer Sa-bdag se-ba gdan-'ding, the royal astrologer Se-ba bla-mkhyen, the chan-
cellor of the exchequer Se-byi, the bodyguard assassin Se-shar, the royal groom Se'u rta-khrid, the royal dog-walker Hang-phan ser-po
bya-ra-ba, the royal policeman Se-lo sa-'chag kungs-myul, the royal steed Se-ba rang-rta, the winged timekeeper Se-bya, the
crown prince Te-se, the princess dkar-sham, her husband Prince sBal-te, and the royal dog Hal-khyi nag-po; and the eighteen main
spirit lords of the months, namely: 'Brug-lha, The-se 'grum-bu, Nang-lha, Zla-dngos, Zla-grungs, Lha-Inga, Lha-dgu, Se-rgyal bcu-gcig,
Sa-dmag, Sa-yi lha-mo bstan-ma, rGan-rgon, rNga-zor dmar-po, Byi-lam sngon-mo, 'Phar-ba mgo-dgu, 1To-phye, gNam-mdzod, Hal-
khyi, and gNam-thig ser-nag.
For example, in the case of the eastern direction, it is said that King The-se is present for seventy-two days under
the wood tiger sign, before moving successively southwards. Thus, for example, when The-se is present in conjunction with the iron
tiger sign, a corpse of that sign should not be removed, but it may be removed if it has one of the other tiger signs.
Among the spirit lords of the soil governing the days, there are those such as gTso-bo gser-mdzod ser-po who are
present on any given day of the month; and others such as Li-byi nag and Khru-lu who are present in wine-jars on the mouse day, in the
storeroom on the ox day, in the door during the tiger day, and so forth; while the spirit lords of the hours headed by gYu-mdzod sngon-
mo may converge upon any hour of the day. 99
The directional numeric squares for corpse disposal are indicated on the chart (Plate 13, fig. 16), extending into
each of the cardinal and intermediate directions in a series of nine successive steps or bands. These indicate the pathways for disposal of
the corpse. In general, white numeric squares are auspicious for corpse disposal, green and yellow numeric squares are mediocre, while
blue and red numeric squares are inauspicious. More specifically, no corpse of a child should be removed under White One. No corpse at
all should be removed under Black Two. No corpse of a climbing accident victim or one ending the family line should be removed under
Blue Three. No widowed or leprous corpse or one blighted by the serpentine spirits and spirit lords of the soil should be removed under
Green Four. No corpse of a monk, or one asphyxiated, buried alive or smitten by contagious diseases should be removed under Yellow
Five. No Bon-po corpse, no pregnant corpse, or one slain through blood feud or injury should be carried out under White Six. No corpse
smitten by stroke or haemorrhage, or the corpse of a child, along with those of the auspicious (bkra) and infant (sri'u) classes, should be
removed under Red Seven. No widowed corpse should be removed under White Eight; otherwise all are auspicious. Lastly, no kingly,
aged or injured corpse should be removed under Red Nine.
In general, the principal is maintained that if a corpse is removed under an enemy-relationship formed by the
year-sign and the numeric square, it will be inauspicious for relatives with a sign in a friend-relationship. For example, if a corpse is
removed under one of the four adversarial signs and Green Four, it will be inauspicious for those of the mouse or pig sign.
Conversely, when the proper procedures are followed and the prescribed rituals are implemented, the following
modes of disposal are deemed auspicious: those of auspicious (bkra) corpses under White One, victims of lightning under Black Two,
those of insane persons under Blue Three, those of asphyxiated victims and disabled persons under Green Four, those of drowned vic-
tims under Yellow Five, those of fatally wounded males and adult females under White Six, those of lepers under Red Seven, and those of
stroke victims under White Eight or Red Nine. In addition, the funeral ceremony should be postponed until ritual exorcism has taken
effect if kings are disposed of under White One, commoners under Black Two, Bon priests under Blue Three, lepers under Green Four,
and Buddhist monks under Yellow Five.
The directional trigrams for corpse disposal are generally divided into those of the four auspicious trigram
aspects (bzang-bzhi) and those of the four inauspicious trigram aspects (ngan-bzhi). 100 More specifically, a corpse should not be
removed in the direction where the ‘cutting influence of demons' (bdud-gcod) is present, so that one who dies under Li should not be
removed in the direction of Kham, for example. Similarly, it will be inauspicious if the trigram suggests an adversarial tomb aspect.
For example, if a corpse is removed under a horse or snake sign and the trigram Kham, it will be inauspicious for those with a bird
or monkey sign, and so forth.
The directional gates for the living relatives (gson-gyi sgo-phyogs) at the time of the corpse's removal from the
house are determined by the need to avoid the direction corresponding to one's own year-sign, and adversarial or seventh-removed
aspects (bdun-zur), and hostile days or hours. By contrast, the directional gates for the deceased (gshin-gyi sgo-phyogs) are determined by
Opposite Detail of Plate 20, fig. 3 (see p. 333), showing predictions of
rebirth in the antigod realm based on the dragon or ox hour of death



354
The White Beryl
the need to avoid a sign in an enemy-relationship to the deceased's own sign. Thus, a corpse with a horse or snake sign should not be
removed to the north, one with a bird or monkey sign should not be removed to the south, one with a tiger or hare sign should not be
removed to the west, one with a mouse or pig sign should not be removed to the intermediate directions, and one with an ox, dragon,
sheep or dog sign should not be removed to the east. Otherwise, it will be inauspicious for friends. This section of the divinations con-
cerning death concludes with a discussion of the different places within the house where the different previously identified types of corpse
should be placed prior to their disposal. 101
Plate 13, fig. 16 (Ms I: ff. 56-58): Terrestrial chart indicating the appropriate direction of corpse disposal (gshin-po'i phung-po gtong-rim; White Beryl, ff. 3816–388b)
South direction (fire element)
The following sequence of numeric squares: Red 9; White 1; Black 2;
Blue 3; Green 4; Yellow 5; White 6; Red 7; White 8, portends the
South-east direction (earth element)
The following sequence of numeric squares: Green 4; Yellow 5; White
6; Red 7; White 8; Red 9; White 1; Black 2; Blue 3, portends the
following sequence of year-signs for corpse disposal: wood snake; fire
snake; earth snake; iron snake; water snake; wood horse; fire horse;
earth horse; iron horse; water horse.
South-west direction (earth element)
The following sequence of numeric squares: Black 2; Blue 3; Green 4;
Yellow 5; White 6; Red 7; White 8; Red 9; White 1, portends the
following sequence of year-signs for corpse disposal: wood sheep; fire
following sequence of year-signs for corpse disposal: wood dragon;
fire dragon; earth dragon; iron dragon; water dragon.
sheep; earth sheep; iron sheep; water sheep.
West direction (iron element)
The following sequence of numeric squares: Red 7; White 8; Red 9;
East direction (wood element)
The following sequence of numeric squares: Blue 3; Green 4; Yellow 5;
White 6; Red 7; White 8; Red 9; White 1; Black 2, portends the
following sequence of year-signs for corpse disposal: wood tiger; fire
tiger; earth tiger; iron tiger; water tiger; wood hare; 102 fire hare; earth
White 1; Black 2; Blue 3; Green 4; Yellow 5; White 6, portends the
following sequence of year-signs for corpse disposal: wood monkey;
fire monkey; earth monkey; iron monkey; water monkey; wood bird;
fire bird; earth bird; iron bird; water bird.
hare; iron hare; water hare.
North-east direction (earth element)
The following sequence of numeric squares: White 8; Red 9; White 1;
Black 2; Blue 3; Green 4; Yellow 5; White 6; Red 7 portends the
following sequence of year-signs for corpse disposal: wood ox; fire ox;
North-west direction (earth element)
The following sequence of numeric squares: White 6; Red 7; White 8;
Red 9; White 1; Black 2; Blue 3; Green 4; Yellow 5, portends the
following sequence of year-signs for corpse disposal: wood dog; fire
dog; earth dog; iron dog; water dog.
earth ox; iron ox; water ox.
North direction (water element)
The following sequence of numeric squares: White 1; Black 2; Blue 3;
Green 4; Yellow 5; White 6; Red 7; White 8; Red 9, portends the
following sequence of year-signs for corpse disposal: wood pig; fire
pig; earth pig; iron pig; water pig; wood mouse; fire mouse; earth
mouse; iron mouse; water mouse.
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī, for whom this is the tenth category, provides the following summary (Moonbeams, f. 37a):
The tenth category concerns the following eleven calculations
Through which the directions for (corpse) disposal (is determined]:
Year, numeric square, trigram, direction, type of corpse,
Month, day, planet, constellation, hour,
103
And the year-sign of the most senior) living relative."
Pebbles are then placed in the four cardinal directions,
Corresponding in colour to the elements,
And in the four intermediate directions, variegated in colour,
[Thus indicating] the correct direction (of disposal appropriate) for each distinct (corpse).
13. Predictions concerning important remedial means of warding off
irritations associated with death (shi-'grams sgab-bcad-par
bya-ba'i thabs-gnad, White Beryl, ff. 388b-405a)
There are various ritual means, including ritual charms (gto) and o
There are various ritual means, including ritual charms (gto) and circular amulet charts ('khor-lo), which may be employed to ward off and
protect against the diverse irritations associated with death when it coincides with certain trigrams, inauspicious numeric squares or
inauspicious years, months, days, hours, seasons, planets or constellations. Lo-chen Dharmaśrī, for whom this is the twelfth category,
provides the following summary (Moonbeams, f. 37b): 104
The twelfth category concerns the concluding rituals,
In which ritual charms (gto) are utilised to cut off ſirritation)."05
These rectify degenerations associated with the present year,
The log-men year, numeric square, trigram, growth and decline sectors,
Month, day, hour, planet and constellation (of death).
And they also bring about rectification
In cases when the pebble of the [most senior ) living relative portends great calamity. 106
Black pebbles should be placed on any of these aspects
Requiring such methods of rectification,
And white ones on those which do not.



355
Divinations of death
S529
CO2
TEORI
CUSTOM
ESE
CH)
B60334
090
LA
INS
BOSCO
SIA
steel
SOS
SEX280 &
MERS
2
322
KER20
ALLOY
EXAM
STE
N
SON
DZIES
PS
LASSER
12
SUS
QUE
SOR OS
TE
36
SEN
AUX
932
2:32
S 250
24
RES
ER
BESCOGS
&9c
NO
hora
NETWORK
KO
ce
PERETTA
*
KERA
33
SEX285
SOD
PXC
CA
19
SP
W
ESCO
ST
2
Plate 13, fig. 16



356
The White Beryl
14. Predictions concerning public funeral ceremonies
(shid-kyi ston-mo khrom-rtsis, White Beryl, ff. 405a-406b)
If there are great obstacles for the living relatives or the recurrence of death is strongly indicated and there is no wish to offer food in the
name of the deceased, the funeral should be covert and not be carried out publicly. However, if the death coincides with White One and
the funeral is not carried out, there will be irritations to a bereaved husband; and conversely if no funeral is undertaken when the death
coincides with Red Nine, there will be irritations to a bereaved wife.
In general, if the deceased remains in a peaceful state, no harm will come to the living relatives, and there will
be no irritations to either the prosperity of the living or the rebirth of the deceased if the funeral is carried out publicly. It is said to
be inauspicious if the year and month of death coincide with the adversarial and seventh-removed aspects (bdun-zur) of a living
relative, so that even if there is a wish to offer food in the name of the deceased and funeral ceremonies are carried out, it will be
inauspicious both in the short term and in the long term. Various remedial rites are prescribed, including those which exorcise the
elements ('byung-ba'i ar-gnon), and those which attract good luck on the basis of the nine numeric squares (sme-dgu-steng-du grang-'gugs).
In this mode of divination, a staggering 2,920 pebbles may be employed, including 136 basic or resultant pebbles,
and 2,784 pebbles of recognition.107
15. Predictions concerning the funeral procession, the selection of the
funeral site, and the recitations pertaining to the five kinds of funeral
(dur-rdzongs-dang sa-'tshol dur-Inga'i smrang-sgo dbye,
White Beryl, ff. 406a-418a)
The final section of divination on death includes the actual rites, visualisations and recitations that are to be performed in the course of
the various types of funeral ceremony. It comprises the preliminary visualisations and procedures of the funeral procession, which vary
according to the eight trigrams and which are designed to create harmony between the living relatives and the deceased. These prelimi-
naries include a description of the implements used for the construction of tombs, graves, pyres and so forth, and the criteria for selecting
different types of funeral site.
The main part then describes the grand and lesser funerals, including the actual construction of the tomb, pyre or
grave, in front of which appropriate food-offerings are placed. Different recitations should then be made, depending on whether the
funeral is a sky burial, a water burial, a cremation, interment or entombment, and these are all given in the text, along with the appropri-
ate recitation for lesser funerals.
In the case of grand funerals, ritual offerings are made, and those who have knowledge of such divination tech-
niques should follow the correct procedures and prepare the ritual charms (gto) which are the remedial means of bonding the living and
the dead. Good luck should then be attracted on the basis of the nine numeric squares and so forth, again utilising the prescribed rituals
and recitations given in the text. Generally, in this mode of divination, eight pebbles are employed, including four resultant pebbles. 108
Lo-chen Dharmasri's summary of the pebbles and predictions pertaining to the twelve categories of divination of death
When all the aforementioned categories of divination concerning death are jointly calculated, according to Lo-chen 187 divinatory peb-
bles are employed. Then, once the piles of white and black pebbles have been tallied, twelve further predictive pebbles should be added,
one for each of the twelve categories. These should be white if the white pebbles are predominant, black if the reverse is the case, and mot-
tled if their number is equal.
It is important to remember that when the predictions are made with regard to the five types of funeral, such
as cremation and entombment, one white pebble represents an identity-relationship between the deceased and the type of
funeral, whereas two white pebbles represent a mother-son relationship, two black pebbles represent a son-mother relationship,
one black pebble represents an enemy-friend relationship, and one white and one black pebble represent a friend-enemy relation-
ship. When predictions are made with regard to the types of auspicious and inauspicious corpse, white and black pebbles are respec-
tively utilised; and when the correct direction for disposal of a corpse is calculated, the pebble should correspond to the correct year-
sign. When calculations are made concerning subsequent rebirth, one white pebble indicates rebirth among the gods, one of each
suggests rebirth among humans, and one black pebble suggests rebirth among the inferior existences. The number of pebbles represent-
ing the concluding rites should also correspond.
The overall schematic chart according to Lo-chen Dharmaśrī's interpretation can therefore be outlined as
shown in chart 9.12.
9.12 Overall schematic chart
187 Divinatory
65 pebbles of the vitality, body, destiny and luck
11 pebbles based on
11 pebbles based on
65 pebbles of the
11 pebbles
11 pebbles
12 pebbles
10 pebbles of
pebbles, comprising:
elements and constitutional types
the trigrams
the numeric squares
of direction
of rebirth
concluding rites
12 pebbles of
1 pebble determining the
1 pebble determining the
distinct funeral elements
1 pebble determining
the type of funeral
of corpse type
1 pebble determining
the mode of corpse
5 pebbles determining untimely/timely death,
death-wish, sustenance, luck and funeral status
1 pebble determining
1 pebble determining
1 pebble determining
the realm of subsequent
conclusive analysis,
faults and retributions
recurrence of death
the direction of corpse
whether the irritations to
comprising:
disposal
disposal
rebirth
posterity have been cut off
The predictions will then correspond to the colours of these pebbles of conclusive analysis. Among them, the pebble of the vitality ele-
ment will determine whether death is timely, the pebble of the body element will determine the tomb sector (dur-sa) or death-wish, the
pebble of the destiny element will determine whether sustenance (zas-skal) is sufficient, the pebble of the luck element will determine
whether the lotus-tree of luck is broken, the pebble of the constitutional type will determine the status of the funeral, the pebble of the tri-
gram will determine the type of retribution, the pebble of the numeric square will determine the recurrence of death among the bereaved,
the pebble of the distinct funeral elements ('byung-dur sil-bu) will determine cremation and so forth, the pebble of the corpse type will
determine the position in which the corpse is laid out, the pebble of the direction of corpse disposal will determine the direction in which a
corpse should be removed from the house, the pebble of the realm of rebirth will determine where the deceased will be reborn, and the
pebble of the concluding ritual charms (gzhug-gcod gto) will determine whether irritations consequent on death are cut off, ensuring the
succession of the family line.



ninanti
Above Detail of Plate 20, fig. 3 (see p. 333), showing predictions of
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī states (Moonbeams, ff. 375–39a):
rebirth in the god realms based on the tiger or hare hour of death
In this way, there are altogether one hundred and eighty-seven
One white and one black pebble represent a friend-enemy
Through (that of] body element one divines the place of the funeral,
Through (that of] destiny element one divines whether sustenance is
pebbles
relationship
Representing the funeral ceremonies for the deceased. 109
[Between the deceased) and the type of funeral.
The number of white and black (pebbles]
sufficient,
And through the pebble of luck element
One divines whether the ſlotus]-tree of luck [is broken). 110
Through the pebble of the constitutional type one divines the status of
Auspicious and inauspicious corpse-types
Corresponding to those twelve categories, should then be tallied,
And twelve [further] predictive pebbles should be placed alongside,
White ones if the white (tally is greater),
the funeral,
Are indicated respectively by white and black (pebbles).
The correct direction (for disposal of the corpse)
Is indicated by the placement of a pebble
Corresponding to the correct year [-sign).
Black ones if the reverse is the case,
And half of each if their number is equal.
Through [that of the trigram one divines the retributions,
Through (that of] even and odd (numeric squares) one divines the
recurrence (of death]
As for the places of rebirth,
One white (pebble] indicates (rebirth among the gods,
And through (that of the elemental funerals
As for the predictions pertaining to the five types of funeral,
[Including) cremation and entombment, in particular:
One white pebble represents an identity-relationship
One of each suggests (rebirth among] humans,
And one black (pebble rebirth among] the inferior existences.
One divines cremation, entombment (and so forth].
Through (the pebble indicating] the types of corpse
One examines the position (in which the corpse is laid out],
Through (the pebble indicating) the direction of disposal
[Between the deceased) and the type of funeral.
Lastly, it is important that the number of pebbles
Two white pebbles represent a mother-son relationship
Representing the concluding ritual charms also correspond.
[Between the deceased) and the type of funeral.
One examines the correct direction (for corpse disposal],
Two black pebbles represent a son-mother relationship,
And through the pebble indicating the place of rebirth
[Between the deceased) and the type of funeral.
The predictions may then be made,
Corresponding to the colours of these pebbles of conclusive analysis.
Thus, through (the pebble of vitality element one divines whether
One examines where [the deceased) will be reborn.
[Finally], through the concluding ritual charms
One black pebble represents an enemy-friend relationship,
[Between the deceased) and the type of funeral.
death is timely,
[The irritations] consequent on death are cut off.
Lo-chen's Dharmaśrī's conclusion reads as follows (Moonbeams, f. 39a):
It is therefore most important that the auspicious types of funeral,
Including cremation and entombment,
And the remedies such as the concluding ritual means
Of warding off irritations and the recurrence [of death]
Should be adopted with a motivation beneficial to both the dead and the living,
In accordance with the instructions and writings on death, 111
Such as the Auto-commentary on Placed Pebbles (Bor-rde rang-'grel.



The thirty Chinese and Tibetan computational charts



360
The White Beryl
The divination system known as the 'thirty Chinese and Tibetan computational charts', which is depicted on two folios of the painted
manuscript (MS I: ff.1–2; Plate 14), is said to have been expounded in order to eliminate error and promote the clear understanding of
what should be abandoned and what should be accepted with regard to auspicious and inauspicious future outcomes for subjects of
diverse backgrounds or status. Lo-chen Dharmaśrī also summarises this system in Moonbeams, giving it pride of place among the six
main themes of elemental divination, which he enumerates as follows (f. 17a/b):
The detailed and distinctive computational charts
Are all subsumed within the following six topics:
The thirty Chinese and Tibetan computational charts,
The fixed system (of divination concerning natal horoscope),
[The divination of compatible marriage,
[The divination of obstacle years,
The divination of ill-health, and the divination of death.
The first topic is the essence of all [divination] sciences.
Division of the computational charts into Chinese and Tibetan types
Diverse enumerations of these ‘thirty Chinese and Tibetan computational charts' appear to have been current. The painted manuscript
exactly follows the enumeration given in White Beryl, Ch. 26, which numbers the charts consecutively from one to thirty without
differentiating them into two sub-groups of fifteen. Other sources, however, attempt to make such a division between the 'fifteen Chinese
computational charts' and the ‘fifteen Tibetan computational charts’. Sangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho himself in his introduction to the leg-
endary origins and transmission of elemental divination (White Beryl, ff. 147b-148b) offers one such attempt, outlined as follows:
The fifteen Chinese computational charts, which were systematised by Chinese and Tibetan scholars, are said to comprise: the
skyes-pa dar-ma mda''geng chart, through which harmony between mother and child is calculated (ma-bu mthun-sbyor
rtsis); the rma-bya mjing-bsnol chart, through which the procedures for a bride's departure are calculated (bag-ma'i 'gro-lam
brtsi); the rgya'i bang-so khra-bo chart, through which geomancy (gnas-dang khang-pa'i rtsis) is calculated; the rin-chen
'od-'bar chart, through which the quality of agricultural land is calculated (zhing-sa bzang-ngan brtsi); the nor-bu chart,
through which gems are inspected (nor brtsi); the sbal-bu ser-po'i gnyid chart, through which luck pertaining to childbirth is
calculated (byis-pa'i btsas klungs brtsi); the lha-bu dmar-po chart, through which lifelong companion gods are recognised
(go-ba'i lha ngos-bzung); the dur-byas chart, through which demons are recognised (dre ngos-bzung); the dpag-bsam
shing-gi sdong-po chart, through which the divinations of natal horoscope (tshe-rabs las-rtsis) are examined; the skye-
shing chart, through which obstacle years (skeg-rtsis) are calculated; the gYu-shug 'bar-ba'i stong-nyid chart, through which
the good and bad sectors of growth and decline are calculated (dar-gud bzang-ngan brtsi); the mi-ro dmar-po chart, through
which cremation and entombment are calculated (bsreg-sgrub brtsi-ba); the thod-dgu brtsegs-pa chart, through which the
adversarial tomb-signs (dur-gshed) are examined; the ched-nag chart, through which the tomb sector is calculated (dur-sa
brtsi); and the sa-bdag sgo-gsum chart, through which the beneficial ritual charms are determined (phan-gto).
The fifteen Tibetan computational charts comprise: the shel-gyi bya-khyung chart, through which
five calculations are made in respect of kings; the gangs-kyi seng-ge dkar-mo chart, through which five calculations are made
in respect of Buddhist monks and mantrins; the gYu-'brug chart, through which five calculations are made in respect of Bon
priests; the glang-po chart, through which five calculations are made in respect of ministers; the gdags-kyi khyi lnga chart,
through which five calculations are made in respect of adult males; the srings-bya dmar-po chart, through which five
calculations are made in respect of wives; the rgya-stag dar-ma chart, through which five calculations are made in respect
of young men; the mthing-gi rma-bya chart, through which five calculations are made in respect of young girls; the khu-byug
sngon-po chart, through which five calculations are made in respect of children; the yid-bzhin nor chart, through which
resources are calculated (longs-spyod brtsi); the gling-dgu chart, through which prognoses concerning riding horses ('og-rta),
domestic dogs (sgo-khyi) and domestic servants (bran-gYog) are calculated; the rdo-rje rgya-gram chart, through which the
vitality element is calculated in respect of males; the 'khor-lo chart, through which the body element is calculated in respect of
children; the gYung-drung chart, through which the destiny element is calculated in respect of females; and the padma 'dab-
brgyad chart, through which the luck element is calculated in respect of aristocrats.
It is clear that not all of these charts correspond to the standard enumeration of thirty described in detail in White Beryl, Ch. 26, and
depicted on Plate 14. Lo-chen Dharmaśrī, in Moonbeams, gives a different structure, whereby of the thirty charts presented in Ch. 26,
numbers 1-7 are identified as Chinese computational charts 1–7; numbers 8–14 as Tibetan computational charts 1–7; numbers 15–22 as
Chinese computational charts 8–15; and numbers 23–30 as Tibetan computational charts 8–15. The structure adopted here follows
Chapter 26 in conformity with the manuscript. Lo-chen’s verses have therefore been rearranged within this sequence.
Deployment of the divinatory pebbles
When divinations are made in the context of these distinct computational charts, each calculation has a distinct starting point (skor-'go).
Accordingly, Sangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho (f. 300b) explains that of the fifteen Chinese computational charts, the first requires the calcula-
tion to be made consecutively, starting from the mouse and ox years in an identity-relationship with the subject's own destiny element.
The second starts from the tiger and hare years in a son-relationship to the subject's element. The third starts from the dragon and snake
years in a friend-relationship, the fourth from the horse and sheep years in an enemy-relationship, the fifth from the bird and monkey
years in a mother-relationship, the sixth from the dog and pig years in an identity-relationship, the seventh from the mouse and ox years
in a son-relationship, the eighth from the tiger and hare years in a friend-relationship, the ninth from the dragon and snake years in an
enemy-relationship, the tenth from the horse and sheep years in a mother-relationship, the eleventh from the bird and monkey years in



361
The thirty Chinese and Tibetan computational charts
Above Detail of Plate 14, fig. 6 (see p. 368), showing the striped tiger
chart used for divinations concerning adult males
an identity-relationship, the twelfth from the dog and pig years in a son-relationship, the thirteenth from the mouse and ox years in a
friend-relationship, the fourteenth from the tiger and hare years in an enemy-relationship, and the fifteenth from the dragon and snake
years in a mother-relationship.
As for the fifteen Tibetan computational charts, the first is calculated starting from the horse and sheep years in
an identity-relationship with the subject's destiny element, the second from the bird and monkey years in a son-relationship, the third
from the dog and pig years in a friend-relationship, the fourth from the mouse and ox years in an enemy-relationship, the fifth from the
tiger and hare years in a mother-relationship, the sixth from the dragon and snake years in an identity-relationship, the seventh from the
horse and sheep years in a son-relationship, the eighth from the bird and monkey years in a friend-relationship, the ninth from the dog
and pig years in an enemy-relationship, the tenth from the mouse and ox years in a mother-relationship, the eleventh from the tiger and
hare years in an identity-relationship, the twelfth from the dragon and snake years in a son-relationship, the thirteenth from the horse
and sheep years in a friend-relationship, the fourteenth from the bird and monkey years in an enemy-relationship, and the fifteenth from
the dog and pig years in a mother-relationship.
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises the number of divination pebbles in the following verses (Moonbeams, f. 17b):
Now there are elaborate, moderate, and concise modes of deploying the pebbles
Within the thirty Chinese and Tibetan computational charts.
Among them, the elaborate method [is explained) in this context.
Accordingly, the pebbles are gathered into groups of eight,
Corresponding to each of the computational charts,
So that there are altogether two hundred and forty (pebbles).
First the bases of the respective divination charts are enumerated:
Among them, there are the fifteen Chinese computational charts... [ff. 176-18b),
And the fifteen Tibetan computational charts [ff. 186–19b).
The count is made in reverse (i.e. anti-clockwise) for subjects with a female year-sign, starting from the female year of a given pair,
and consecutively or clockwise for those with a male year-sign, starting from the male year of a given pair. On reaching the subject's
log-men year-sign in any of these charts, it is compared with the vitality element four places backwards (yar-bzhi'i srog), with the body
element four places forwards (mar-bzhi'i lus), with the destiny element eleven places backwards (yar bcu-gcig dbang-thang), and with
the luck element eleven places forwards (mar-gyi bcu-gcig klung-rta). In addition, the vitality element seven places backwards (yar-



362
The White Beryl
SEA
HO
Above Detail of Plate 14, fig. 20 (see p. 378), showing the black kite
chart used for divinations concerning the harmful influence of
malignant demons
bdun srog) and the body element seven places forwards (mar-bdun lus) are compared respectively with the subject's vitality and body
elements, while the subject's log-men year-sign is compared with the corresponding destiny and luck elements. In this way, for each of
the thirty charts there are eight basic divination pebbles, making 240 pebbles altogether. When these are deployed, a mother-
relationship is represented by three white pebbles, a friend-relationship by two white pebbles, an identity-relationship of water or
earth by one white pebble, a son-relationship by one white and one black pebble, an identity-relationship of fire, iron or wood by
one black pebble, and an enemy-relationship by two black pebbles. Chart 10.1 summarises the eight calculations to be made, which-
ever chart is employed.
10.1 The eight calculations of the thirty computational charts
the vitality element four places backwards (yar-bzhi'i srog)
1. Subject's log-menyear-sign is contrasted with
2. Subject's log-men year-sign is contrasted with
3. Subject's log-menyear-sign is contrasted with
4. Subject's log-menyear-sign is contrasted with
the body element four places forwards (mar-bzhi'i lus)
the destiny element eleven places backwards (yar bcu-gcig dbang-thang)
the luck element eleven places forwards (mar-gyi bcu-gcig klung-rta)
5. Subject's vitality element is contrasted with
the vitality element seven places backwards (yar-bdun srog)
6. Subject's body element is contrasted with
the body element seven places forwards (mar-bdun lus)
7. Subject's log-menyear-sign is contrasted with
the corresponding destiny element
8. Subject's log-menyear-sign is contrasted with
the corresponding luck element
This methodology may be clarified in the context of exemplary chart 10.2, prepared on behalf of a king or potentate, born in the fire
dragon year. Since the subject has a male year-sign, the count will commence from the fire mouse year and proceed in a clockwise direc-
tion. Thus, in sector 1, the subject's current log-men, fire, is contrasted with fire, which is the vitality element four places backwards. In
sector 2, the same log-men element, fire, is also contrasted with fire, which is the body element four places forwards, and so on. Once all
eight sectors have been calculated, prognostications are then made in respect of each, corresponding to the type of relationship formed
between the elements in question.
10.2 Exemplary chart
Sector 5
Sector 6
Sector 4
wood v. water = 00
Sector 3
earth v. iron = 0x
earth v. wood =XX
Fire mouse
Sector 7
wood v. wood = X
Fire ox
earth v. earth = 0
Sector 2
Sector 1
Sector 8
fire v. fire =X
fire v. fire = X
earth v. wood =XX



363
The thirty Chinese and Tibetan computational charts
On the actual placement of the pebbles, Lo-chen Dharmaśrī comments (Moonbeams, ff. 195–20a):
In the case of those born in a female year,
Having determined these (thirty] charts which form the basis of the divination,
Now, there follows the explanation of the placement of the pebbles.
In the case of any of those Chinese and Tibetan computational charts,
Or eleven places forwards in the case of those born in a male year.
A white marker pebble should be used in the sectors which are counted backwards,
One should [first] recognise the year-sign of the divination subject,
And a black one in those which are counted forwards.?
And the [type of chart which is the basis for the subject's divination,
For the correct deployment [of the divinatory pebbles),
Count four places backwards or forwards to the vitality sector,
With its (distinctive) starting point.
And place a pebble on that sector, which marks the subject's vitality.
Then, depending on whether the subject of the divination has a male or female (natal] year,
[To find the vitality sector), one should count four places backwards,
Then, count seven places backwards or forwards to the body sector,
In the case of those born in a female year,
And place a pebble on that sector, which marks the subject's body.
Or four places forwards in the case of those born in a male year.
Then, count eleven places backwards or forwards to the destiny sector,
Then, (to find the body sector), one should count seven places backwards,
And place a pebble on that sector, which marks the subject's destiny.
In the case of those born in a female year,
Then, place a pebble to indicate the contrast
Between the luck elements of the basic male or female year-sign.s
Or seven places forwards in the case of those born in a male year.
Then, (to find the destiny sector), one should count eleven places backwards,
And the luck element of the subject of the divination.
The thirty distinct computational charts (White Beryl, ff. 300b-307b)
The commentarial source for the prognoses that follow is said to be the 'Phrul-gyi mig-tshags, a rare work which is preserved in the Potala
archive, and which was certainly accessible to Sangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho. Lo-chen Dharmaśrī also observes (Moonbeams, f. 20a):
The positive and negative predictions
Pertaining to the deployment [of the divination pebbles)
Should be well ascertained by referring to the commentary entitled 'Phrul-gyi mig-tshags. 4
The actual charts are enumerated as follows:
1. White garuda (bya-khyung garuựa, White Beryl, ff. 3000–301a)
In the first chart, utilised for divinations concerning kings and potentates, the following eight calculations are sequentially made:
whether the blue heaven will be rent or not (dgung-sngon ral-ma ral); whether the royal turban will fall to the ground or not (la-thod sa-
steng-la lhung-ma lhung); whether the palace residence will be deserted or not (pho-brang gdan-sa-nyid stongs-ma stongs); whether the king-
dom will be rife with many defamations or not (yul mi-kha mang-gis stong-gleng byas-ma-byas); whether the royal subjects will rebel
against the king or not ('bangs-kyis rje-dpon-la skya-'dus byung-ma-byung); whether the king will be eclipsed or not (rkang-rdel nam-mkha'-
la shor-ma-shor); whether the pile of royal tiger- and leopard-skin rugs will be worn down or not (stag-gzig gra-spu-rnams yal-ma-yal); and
whether the royal carpet will have faded or not (zhugs-gdan grum-tse-de stongs-ma stongs). Exemplary chart 10.3 has been prepared in
respect of a subject born in the fire dragon year:
10.3 Exemplary chart
wood v. water = 000
wood v. wood =X
earth v. iron = 0x
earth v. wood =XX
Fire mouse
earth v. earth = 0
Fire ox
fire v. fire=X
fire v. fire = X
earth v. wood =XX
Now, if the pebble placed in the first of these sectors is white, it portends good auspices for the ancestral lineage; and if it is black, it por-
tends many ups and downs for the ancestral lineage. If the pebble placed in the second sector is white, the royal parents will be well, the
protector deities will be present, and there will be no obstacles to the royal will. However, if it is black, it portends an accidental death due
to fire, and it will be inauspicious for the father and paternal uncles. If the pebble placed in the third sector is white, the king will have no
diseases or enemies, but if it is black the palace will be deserted and the king will risk the blunder of moving to another country. If the
pebble placed in the fourth sector is white, there will be no bad reputation and wishes will be successfully accomplished. However, if it is
black, there will be defamation and accusations, requiring counteractive thread-crosses to be made. If the pebble placed in the fifth sector
is white, the subjects will be obedient, and the king will be renowned and free from rebellions, but if it is black, the citizens will rebel and
even relatives will become hostile, for which reason certain ritual charms (gto) should be offered. If the pebble placed in the sixth sector is
white, there will be no danger of the king being eclipsed and no enemies will emerge, but if it is black, the subjects and wrongdoers will
become hostile, requiring counteractive ritual charms to be made. If the pebble placed in the seventh sector is white, it portends that the
king will have good fortune and happiness, regardless of the ills endured by his paternal ancestors. However, if it is black, the king will
decline even if the paternal ancestors are well, so that all the appropriate esoteric charms (gto) should be made. Lastly, if the pebble placed
in the eighth sector is white, the king will be well even if the paternal ancestors are in decline, and he will have independence with regard
to the five elements. However, ifit is black, the king will decline even if the paternal ancestors are well, and he may well make the mistake
of moving to another land, losing control of all the five elements. Therefore, appropriate counteractive ritual charms should be made and
the appropriate recitations undertaken. Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises this chart as follows (Moonbeams, f. 17b):
In the first [Chinese computational chart named] 'white crystal garuda',
Which is utilised for the divination concerning kings,
The calculation starts from the wood mouse and ox years
[When the subject has the element wood].5



364
The White Beryl
Plate 14, fig. 1 (Ms I: f. 1):White Garuda (bya-khyung garuda, utilised for divinations concerning kings; White Beryl, ff. 3006–301a)
whether the kingdom will be rife
whether the royal subjects will
whether the king will be eclipsed or
with much defamation or not
(yul mi-kha mang-gis stong-
gleng byas-ma-byas)
rebel against the king or not
('bangs-kyis rje-dpon-la skya-'
dus byung-ma-byung)
not (rkang-rdel nam-mkha'-
la shor-ma-shor)
whether the palace residence
whether the pile of royal tiger- and
WHITE GARUDA
leopard-skin rugs will be worn down
will be deserted or not
(pho-brang gdan-sa-nyid
stongs-ma stongs)
or not (stag-gzig gra-spu-rnams
yal-ma-ya)
whether the royal carpet will have
whether the royal turban will fall
to the ground or not (la-thod
sa-steng-la Thung-ma lhung)
whether the blue heaven will be
rent or not (dgung-sngon
ral-ma ra)
faded or not (zhugs-gdan
grum-tse-de stongs-ma stongs)
Plate 14, fig. 1
2. White snowlion (gangs-seng dkar-mo, White Beryl, f. 301a/b)
In the second chart, utilised for divinations concerning spiritual friends (kalyānamitra), the following eight calculations are sequentially
made: whether the lion throne will collapse or not (seng-g'i gdan-khri 'gyel-ma 'gyel); whether the silk-curtain will fall down or not (dar-yol
zags-ma zags); whether the mandala-offering of gold and turquoise will fracture or not (gser-gYu'i mandal chag-ma chag); whether the
string of the pearl rosary will break or not (mu-tig 'phreng-ba'i thag chad-ma chad); whether the mountain of protection will crumble or not
(mgon-byed ri-ba 'gyel-ma 'gyel); whether the vase of longevity will slip from the hand or not (tshe-'bum lag-pa-nas shor-ma shor); whether
the line of communication between gods and men will be interrupted or not (lha-mi'i 'phrin-lam chad-ma chad); and whether a spiritual
friend's residual actions in respect of the doctrine will be left undone or not (chos-spyod las-'phro-la lus-ma lus). Exemplary chart 10.4 has
been prepared in respect of a subject born in the fire dragon year.
10.4 Exemplary chart
earth v. water = 00
wood v. fire = 0x
wood v. iron = XX
earth v. fire = 00
earth v. iron = 0x
Earth tiger
Earth hare
fire v. earth=0X
fire v. earth = 0x
earth v. water =00
Now, if the pebble placed in the first of these sectors is white, it portends long-term good auspices and prosperity for human beings and
the Buddhist doctrine. If it is black it portends great fluctuations for the subject's paternal relatives, and even if things are moderately
well for the subject, he will have to leave home on account of these misfortunes. If the pebble placed in the second sector is white his for-
tune or merit will flourish. However, if it is black, it portends that there will be demons and obstacles, and one should persevere with the
prescribed virtuous counteracting rites. If the pebble placed in the third sector is white, destiny and good fortune will flourish and wishes
will be fulfilled, but if it is black destiny will decline, there will be accusations, students will become hostile, and one's purpose will be
unsuccessful, for which reason one should persevere in the practice of virtuous acts. If the pebble placed in the fourth sector is white, there
will be no obstacles to the lifespan. However, if it is black, obstacles will impede the lifespan, so that counteractive ritual charms (gto)
should be offered. If the pebble placed in the fifth sector is white, there will be no heretical doctrines, but if it is black heresies will arise
even if one has practised the virtuous doctrine, so one should persevere with feast-offerings and charitable acts. If the pebble placed in the
sixth sector is white, there will be no obstacles to the lifespan or vitality, but if it is black, such obstacles will arise, requiring longevity
rites and ritual ransom from death to be undertaken. If the pebble placed in the seventh sector is white, it portends that the hostile gods
(dgra-lha) and countryside gods (yul-Iha) will be in the vanguard of the line of communication with the gods. However, if it is black there
will be obstacles between gods and humans, requiring the performance of rites of reparation and confession (bskang-bshags). Lastly, if the
pebble placed in the eighth sector is white, the residue of the spiritual friend's past actions will be positive, and he will become potent in
virtuous actions. However, if it is black, the residue will be left incomplete, he will engage in non-virtuous actions, and there will be
obstacles to the lifespan and the doctrine, for which reason he should persevere with virtuous activities. Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises
this chart as follows (Moonbeams, f. 17b):
In the second [Chinese computational chart named) 'white snowlion',
Which is utilised for the divination concerning spiritual friends,
The calculation starts from the fire tiger and fire hare years [when the subject has the element wood). 6
Se
enos
Plate 14, fig. 2 (Ms I:f. 1): White Snowlion (gangs-seng dkar-mo, utilised for divinations concerning spiritual friends; White Beryl, f. 301a/b)
whether the string of the pearl whether the protective mountain whether the vase of longevity will
rosary will break or not (mu-tig will crumble or not (mgon-byed slip from the hand or not (tshe-
'phreng-ba'i thag chad-ma chad ri-ba 'gyel-ma 'gye)
'bum lag-pa-nas shor-ma shor)
whether the mandala-
whether the line of communication
WHITE SNOWLION
between gods and men will be
offering of gold and turquoise
will fracture or not (gser-gYu'i
interrupted or not (Iha-mi'i
mandal chag-ma chag)
'phrin-lam chad-ma chad
whether the silk-curtain will fall
whether the lion throne will
whether his residual actions in respect
down or not (dar-yol zags-ma
collapse or not (seng-g'i gdan-
of the doctrine will be left undone or not
Plate 14, fig. 2.
zags)
khri 'gyel-ma 'gyeh
(chos-spyod las-'phro-la lus-malus)



365
The thirty Chinese and Tibetan computational charts
3. Poisonous snake of existence (srid-pa'i dug-sbruk, White Beryl, ff. 3016–302a)
In the third chart, utilised for divinations concerning mantrins, the following eight calculations are sequentially made: whether the
golden vajra will vanish into space or not (gser-rdor nam-mkha'-la yar-ma yar); whether the silver bell will slip from the hand or not
(dngul-dril lag-nas shor-ma shor); whether the string of the rosary of the meditational deity will break or not (thugs-dam 'phreng-ba'i thag
chad-ma chad); whether the canopy of flayed human hide will be frayed or not (zhing-chen bla-re ral-ma ral); whether the human skull-
drum of existence will be torn from the centre or not (srid-pa'i rnga-chen gzhung-nyid-nas ral-ma ral); whether the injunctions of the
dākinīs? will be infringed or not (mkha'-'gro'i bka'-yi chad byung-ma byung); whether the ritual iron dagger will be broken or not (gri-lcags
phur-bu chag-ma chag); and whether the containers for nectar, blood, and gtor-ma offerings will be empty or not (sman-rag gtor-ma'i snod
stongs-ma stongs). Exemplary chart 10.5 is prepared in respect of a subject born in the fire dragon year.
10.5 Exemplary chart
wood v. water = 0
earth v. earth = 0
earth v. earth = 0
earth v. fire = 000
wood v. wood = X
Iron dragon
Iron snake
fire v. iron=00
fire v. iron = 00
earth v. earth = 0
Now, if the pebble placed in the first of these sectors is white, it portends good auspices because one's aspirations with respect to the vir-
tuous doctrines will all be fulfilled, and the lineage of mantrins will not be interrupted. If it is black, however, it portends that the paternal
ancestors will dislike the Buddhist doctrine and delight in negativity. If the pebble placed in the second sector is white the lineage of the
mantrin will not be interrupted, and awareness (rig-pa) will manifestly be comprehended. However, if it is black, it portends that the
pleasant sound of the bell will be lost, and there will be no positive result even if the mantras have been recited. Yet it will help if the ritual
aversion of the imprecatory goddesses (ma-mo'i bzlog-mangs) and of the Nātha protector who averts battles (mgon-po gYul-bzlogʻ) are
undertaken. If the pebble placed in the third sector is white, the mantrin will be endowed with awareness and merits will increase, but if it
is black there will be obstacles requiring the means for attainment of longevity (tshe-sgrub). If the pebble placed in the fourth sector is
white, wishes will be accomplished and there will be extensive good luck. However, if it is black, the students will become hostile, for
which reason one should persevere with gtor-ma offerings and rites of aversion. If the pebble placed in the fifth sector is white, the
mantrin will have a good reputation, but if it is black, the ritual implements of existence and the dgu-skor thread-cross should be utilised
(srid-pa yo-bcos dgu-skor bya; White Beryl, 302a). If the pebble placed in the sixth sector is white, the dākinīs will continue to offer protec-
tion, but if it is black, appropriate rites of aversion and thread-crosses should be made because the injunctions of the dākinīs will have
been infringed. If the pebble placed in the seventh sector is white, it portends that there will be no obstacles to long life, the paternal
ancestors will come to resemble kings, and the children ministers. However, if it is black there will be obstacles, particularly if the subject
is an adult male, so that the appropriate protective amulets which suppress the treacherous oath-breaking spirits (dam-sri) should be
worn. Lastly, if the pebble placed in the eighth sector is white, it will be auspicious, the paternal ancestors also resembling kings, and the
children ministers. However, if it is black, there is a great danger that the lineage will be interrupted, and eventually degenerate, for
which reason the prescribed ritual charms and thread-crosses should be made, and the ritual means for attainment of nectar, blood and
gtor-ma offerings should be undertaken. Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises this chart as follows (Moonbeams, f. 17b):
In the third (Chinese computational chart named] 'black poisonous snake of existence',
Which is utilised for the divination concerning mantrins and awareness-holders,
The calculation starts from the earth dragon and snake years,
[When the subject has the element wood].
Plate 14, fig. 3 (Ms I:f. 1): Poisonous snake of existence (srid-pa'i dug-sbrul, utilised for divinations concerning mantrins; White Beryl, ff. 3016–302a)
whether the canopy of flayed whether the human skull-drum whether the injunctions of the
human hide will be torn or not of existence will be frayed from ļākinīs will be infringed or not
(zhing-chen bla-re ral-ma ra) the centre or not (srid-pa'i (mkha'-'gro'i bka'-yi chad byung-
rnga-chen gzhung-nyid-nas ma byung)
ral-ma ra)
whether the string of the rosary
of the meditational deity will
POISONOUS SNAKE OF
whether the ritual iron dagger will
be broken or not (gri-Icags phur-bu
chag-ma chag)
break or not (thugs-dam
EXISTENCE
'phreng-ba'i thag chad-ma chad)
Plate 14, fig. 3
whether the containers for nectar,
whether the silver bell will slip
from the hand or not (dngul-dril.
whether the golden vajra will
fade into space or not (gser-
blood and gtor-ma offerings will be
lag-nas shor-ma shor)
rdor nam-mkha'-la yar-ma yan
empty or not (sman-rag gtor-ma'i
snod stongs-ma stongs)
4. Turquoise dragon (gYu-'brug, White Beryl, f. 302a/b)
In the fourth chart, utilised for divinations concerning Bon priests, the following eight calculations are sequentially made: whether the
helmet horns of meteorite will have rusted or not (gnam-lcags bya-ru-de btsa'-yis khyer-ma khyer); whether the divine arrow with the red
notch will slip from the hand or not (lha-mda' ltong-dmar lag-nas shor-ma shor); whether gods and demons will both be disturbed or not
(lha-dang 'dre-gnyis-po go-ldog gyur-ma gyur); whether the divine tips of the svāstika will fade or not (gYung-drung lha-yi gra-la yal-ma yal);
whether the drum and cloche will fall from their pegs or not (rnga-gshang gdang-nas lhung-ma lhung); whether the tiger and leopard



366
The White Beryl
motifs will fade or not (stag-gzig 'dzum-drug-ni yal-ma yal); whether the vulture quills will be broken or not (rgod-phru rked-du chag-ma
chag); and whether the blue sheepskin coat will have fallen down or not (sngo-thul mtha'-nas zags-ma zags). Exemplary chart 10.6 has been
prepared in respect of a subject born in the fire dragon year.
10.6 Exemplary chart
wood v. fire = 0x
earth v. wood =XX
earth v. iron = 0x
wood v. iron =XX
Water horse
earth v. water = 00
Water sheep
fire v. water = XX
fire v. water =XX
earth v. fire
Now, if the pebble placed in the first of these sectors is white, it will be most auspicious; and if it is black, it portends that a Bon temple
should be constructed to make amends. If the pebble placed in the second sector is white, it will be auspicious, but if it is black, it portends
there will be great ups and downs, and so the sa-bdag gud-phur and other rites should be performed. If the pebble placed in the third sector
is white, the gods and demons will not be deranged, but if it is black, rituals such as the lha-'dre yo-bcos should be performed. If the pebble
placed in the fourth sector is white, the lineage will not be interrupted; however, if it is black, it will be interrupted, so that ritual means of
restoration should be implemented. If the pebble placed in the fifth sector is white, it will be auspicious, but if it is black, the male gods
(pho-lha) will flee in agitation, requiring rites of reparation and confession to be performed. If the pebble placed in the sixth sector is
white, the Bon lineage will flourish, but if it is black, it will be inauspicious for the Bon lineage and the land will be blighted by plague-
causing spirits. If the pebble placed in the seventh sector is white, it will be most auspicious, but if it is black it will be inauspicious, requir-
ing prayers, prosperity rites and longevity rituals to be performed. Lastly, if the pebble placed in the eighth sector is white, it will be aus-
picious because the Bon deities will nurture prosperity. However, if it is black, the Bon deities will be enraged, bringing an end to the
family line, so that appropriate counteractive rites should be performed, and temples constructed. Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises this
chart as follows (Moonbeams, ff. 176-18a):
In the fourth [Chinese computational chart named) 'blue celestial turquoise dragon',
Which is utilised for the divination concerning the gShen-rab Bon tradition,
The calculation starts from the iron horse and iron sheep years,
[When the subject has the element wood). 10
ECH
Plate 14, fig. 4 (Ms 1: f. 1): Turquoise dragon (gYu-'brug, utilised for divinations concerning Bon priests; White Beryl, f. 302a/b)
whether the divine tips of the whether the drum and cloche whether the tiger and leopard motifs
svāstika will vanish or not will fall from their pegs or not will fade or not (stag-gzig 'dzum-
(gYung-drung Iha-yi gra-la yal- (rnga-gshang gdang-nas Ihung- drug-ni yal-ma ya)
ma ya)
ma lhung)
whether gods and demons will
whether the vulture quills will be
both be disturbed or not (Iha-
broken or not (rgod-phru rked-du
dang 'dre-gnyis-po go-Idog
chag-ma chag)
gyur-ma gyur)
whether the divine arrow with whether the helmet horns of whether the blue sheepskin coat will
the red notch will slip from the meteorite will have rusted or not have fallen down or not (sngo-thul
hand or not (Iha-mda' Itong (gnam-Icags bya-ru-de btsa'-yis mtha'-nas zags-ma zags)
dmar lag-nas shor-ma shor) khyer-ma khyer)
TURQUOISE DRAGON
Plate 14, fig. 4
5. Steadfast elephant (sa-yi glang-cherr, White Beryl, ff. 302b-303a)
In the fifth chart, utilised for divinations concerning dignitaries or elders (pha-rgan), the following eight calculations are sequentially made:
whether an elder's senior aide will come or not (pha'i gtso-bu-la-ni yong-miyong); whether the main conference room will be left empty or not
(gtso'i 'dun-sa stongs-ma stongs); whether the discussions of the village elders with their walking sticks will be completed or not (spa-'khar-
can-gyi grong khengs-ma khengs); whether there will be punishments or not (bka'-chad yong-mi yong); whether the crystal staff will break or
not (shel-gyi 'gying-'khar chag-ma chag); whether sympathetic friends will become rivals or not (zla-grogs 'gran-sems yong-mi yong); whether
scandal-mongers will gossip or not (kha-mang stong-gleng byed-mi byed); and whether the long-term goal of discussions will be thwarted or
not (gros-phugs bdud-kyis bslus-ma bslus). Exemplary chart 10.7 has been prepared in respect of a subject born in the fire dragon year.
10.7 Exemplary chart
wood v. water = 0
wood v. wood = X
earth v. water = 00
earth v. fire = 000
Wood monkey
earth v. earth = 0
Wood bird
fire v. wood
fire v. wood = 0 0
earth v. wood =XX
Now, if the pebble placed in the first of these sectors is white, it will be auspicious; and if it is black, it portends that the family line of the
chieftain will be interrupted, the conference room may be left empty, and the villagers will be dispersed, for which reason counteractive
rites must be undertaken. If the pebble placed in the second sector is white it will be auspicious, but if it is black, it will generally be inaus-
picious for the country and counteractive ritual charms should be made. If the pebble placed in the third sector is white, it will be auspi-
cious because discussions will be completed, but if it is black there is a great risk of discussions becoming disorderly, with accusations



367
The thirty Chinese and Tibetan computational charts
being bandied about, so that prescribed thread-crosses should be made. If the pebble placed in the fourth sector is white, the subject will
be befriended by village headmen, his purpose will be achieved, and there will be pleasant reports. However, if it is black, the elder will
incur punishment and be subjected to accusations, for which reason the prescribed rites may help. If the pebble placed in the fifth sector is
white, wealth and merits will increase, but if it is black, it will be inauspicious for houses and estates, and particularly for the son of a sister
or aunt. If the pebble placed in the sixth sector is white, the subject will be beloved by his companions and relatives, but if it is black, the
subject's mind will be disturbed and enemies will unjustly arise. If the pebble placed in the seventh sector is white, it portends that there
will be no scandals or bad reports, but if it is black, scandal-mongers will gossip and bandy their rumours and accusations, and it will help
if certain ritual charms are made. Lastly, if the pebble placed in the eighth sector is white, the subject's aspirations will be fulfilled without
obstacles, but if it is black, aides will become hostile, and there will be much unsound advice. Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises this chart as
follows (Moonbeams, f. 18a):
In the fifth [Chinese computational chart named) 'great steadfast elephant',
Which is utilised for the divination concerning very important persons,
The calculation starts from the water bird and water monkey years,
When the subject has the element wood]. 11
Plate 14, fig. 5 (Ms l: f. 1): Steadfast elephant (sa-yi glang-chen; utilised for divinations concerning dignitaries or elders (pha-rgan); White Beryl, ff. 302-303a)
whether there will be
whether the crystal staff will
whether sympathetic friends will
punishments or not (bka'-chad
yong-mi yong)
break or not (shel-gyi 'gying-
'khar chag-ma chag)
become rivals or not (zla-grogs
'gran-sems yong-mi yong)
whether the discussions of
whether scandal-mongers will
villager elders with their walking
gossip or not (kha-mang stong-
gleng byed-mi byed)
sticks will be completed or not
STEADFAST ELEPHANT
(spa-'khar-can-gyi grong
khengs-ma khengs)
whether the main conference
whether an elder's senior aide
whether the long-term goal of
Plate 14, fig. 5
room will be left empty or not
will come or not (pha'i gtso-bu-
discussions will be thwarted or
(gtso'i 'dun-sa stongs-ma
la-ni yong-mi yong)
not (gros-phugs bdud-kyis
stongs)
bslus-ma bslus)
6. Striped tiger (rgya-stag khra-bo, White Beryl, f. 303a/b)
In the sixth chart, utilised for divinations concerning adult males, the following eight calculations are sequentially made: whether the
helmet will be worn down or not (zhva-mog rbab-tu lhung-ma lhung); whether the bow will break or not (mchog-dkar gzhu-mo chag-ma
chag); whether the sword will be rusted or not (mtshon-btsas khyer-ma khyer); whether the horse's saddle will come undone or not ('og-rtas
sga-bros byas-ma byas); whether the spear shaft will break or not (mdung-rked chag-ma chag); whether the pile of the tiger-skin quiver will
fade or not (stag dong-gra yal-ma yal); whether the leopard-skin sheath will be detached from the bow or not (gzig-shubs gzhu bral-ma bral);
and whether the shield strap will be broken or not (phug lung-thag chad-ma chad). Exemplary chart 10.8 has been prepared in respect of a
subject born in the fire dragon year.
10.8 Exemplary chart
wood v. fire = 0x
earth v. earth = 0
earth v. earth = 0
earth v. iron=0x
wood v. iron =XX
Fire dog
Fire pig
fire v. fire = X
fire v. fire = X
earth v. water = 00
Now, if the pebble placed in the first of these sectors is white, it will be auspicious; and if it is black, it portends that there will be
great fluctuations for the paternal relatives and that ill-omens will beset the subject. If the pebble placed in the second sector is white,
it will be auspicious, but if it is black, it will be inauspicious for the subject, who should wear an amulet to protect the vitality element.
If the pebble placed in the third sector is white, it will be auspicious, but if it is black, valour will diminish, for which reason rituals
promoting the vitality element should be undertaken. If the pebble placed in the fourth sector is white, it will be auspicious, but if it is
black, accusations will be unjustly made and one will be subjected to theft, for which reason rites suppressing the hostile treacherous spir-
its (sri) should be undertaken. If the pebble placed in the fifth sector is white, it will be auspicious for the subject's children and grandchil-
dren, but if it is black, rituals should be performed on behalf of the children and grandchildren. If the pebble placed in the sixth sector
is white, it will be auspicious for sisters and wives, but if it is black, it will be inauspicious for sisters and wives. If the pebble placed in
the seventh sector is white, it will be auspicious for food, wealth and clothing. If it is black, however, food and wealth will come and
go, but it will help if appropriate effigies are made. Lastly, if the pebble placed in the eighth sector is white, it will be auspicious for ser-
vants and retainers. If it is black, however, it will be inauspicious for servants and retainers. Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises this chart
as follows (Moonbeams, f. 18a):
In the sixth (Chinese computational chart named) 'striped forest tiger',
Which is utilised for the divination concerning adult males,
The calculation starts from the wood dog and wood pig years,
[When the subject has the element wood). 12



368
The White Beryl
Plate 14, fig. 6 (Ms I:f. 1): Striped tiger (rgya-stag khra-bo, utilised for divinations concerning adult males; White Beryl, f. 303a/b)
whether the horse's saddle will whether the spear shaft will whether the pile of the tiger-skin
come undone or not ('og-rtas break or not (mdung-rked quiver will be worn down or not
sga-bros byas-ma byas) chag-ma chag)
(stag dong-gra yal-ma ya)
whether the sword will be rusted
whether the leopard-skin sheath
or not (mtshon-btsas khyer-ma
STRIPED TIGER
will be detached from the bow or
not (gzig-shubs gzhu bral-ma bra)
khyer)
whether the bow will break or
whether the helmet will fall
whether the shield strap will be
broken or not (phug lung-thag
not (mchog-dkar gzhu-mo
chag-ma chag)
down or not (zhva-mog rbab-tu
Ihung-ma Thung
Plate 14, fig. 6
chad-ma chad)
7. Copper-red ogress (zangs-kyi srin-po dmar, White Beryl, ff. 303b-304a)
In the seventh chart, utilised for divinations concerning wives and women, the following eight calculations are sequentially made:
whether the glorious sun will set at the door or not (dpal-nyi sgo-ru nub-bam ma-nub); whether the white silk pelmet will hang down or not
(dar-dkar sham-bu zags-ma zags); whether the cord of the subject's turquoise will break or not (mtsho-gyu lung-thag chad-ma chad);
whether the golden and turquoise springs will become dry or not (gser-gYu'i chu-mig skams-ma skams); whether a child will slip from the
mother's lap or not (ma-yi bang-pa-nas bu shor-ma shor); whether demons which possess living beings will always cause affliction or not
(gson-'dre rgyun-du gnod-mi gnod); whether the treacherous spirits of childhood (chung-sri)19 will rise up or not (chung-sri langs-ma langs);
and whether the malign goblins (the'u-brang) and elemental spirits will steal the living expenses or not (the'u-brang 'byung-po-yis bsris rku-
mi rku). Exemplary chart 10.9 has been prepared in respect of a subject born in the fire dragon year.
10.9 Exemplary chart
wood v. water = 0°C
wood v. wood =X
earth v. iron = 0X
earth v. wood =XX
Earth mouse
earth v. wood =XX
Earth ox
fire v. earth = 0x
fire v. earth = 0x
earth v. iron = 0x
Now, if the pebble placed in the first of these sectors is white, it will be auspicious; and if it is black, it will be inauspicious for both children
and wealth. If the pebble placed in the second sector is white, it will be auspicious; but if it is black, it will be inauspicious for husbands and
secure friendships, bringing widowhood. If the pebble placed in the third sector is white, it will be auspicious, but if it is black, there will
be many daughters and few sons. If the pebble placed in the fourth sector is white, it will be auspicious for the children and grandchildren,
but if it is black, the children and grandchildren will not flourish, and there will be fatalities. If the pebble placed in the fifth sector is
white, the number of children will be neither deficient nor excessive, but if it is black it will be inauspicious because a child will be carried
off by demons. If the pebble placed in the sixth sector is white, it will be auspicious because the demons haunting the living will not cause
harm, but if it is black the children cannot easily be raised, so certain rites of exorcism must be performed enabling the children to develop
properly. If the pebble placed in the seventh sector is white, it will be auspicious, but if it is black the treacherous spirits of childhood
(chung-sri) should be ritually exorcised. Lastly, if the pebble placed in the eighth sector is white, the children will thrive, but if it is black,
thread-crosses should be made to counteract the stealthy ingress of malign goblins (the'u-brang) and elemental spirits. Lo-chen
Dharmaśrī summarises this chart as follows (Moonbeams, f. 18a):
In the seventh (Chinese computational chart named) 'red copper ogress',
Which is utilised for the divination concerning wives and women,
The calculation starts from the fire mouse and fire ox years,
[When the subject has the element wood). 14
Plate 14, fig. 7 (Ms 1: f. 1): Copper-red ogress (zangs-kyi srin-mo dmar, utilised for divinations concerning wives and women; White Beryl, ff. 3036–304a)
whether the golden and whether a child will slip from whether demons haunting the living
turquoise springs will become
dry or not (gser-gYu'i chu-mig
the mother's lap or not (ma-yi
bang-pa-nas bu shor-ma shon
will always cause affliction or not
(gson-'dre rgyun-du gnod-mi gnod)
skams-ma skams)
whether the cord of the
whether the treacherous spirits of
subject's turquoise will break or
COPPER-RED OGRESS
childhood rise up or not (chung-sri
langs-ma langs)
not (mtsho-gyu lung-thag
chad-ma chad)
whether the white silk pelmet
will hang down or not (dar-dkar
sham-bu zags-ma zags)
whether the glorious sun will
set at the door or not (dpal-nyi
sgo-ru nub-bam ma-nub)
whether the malign goblins and
elemental spirits will steal the living
Plate 14, fig. 7
expenses or not (the 'u-brang
'byung-po-yis bsris rku-mi rku)
8. Golden vajra (gser-gyi rdo-rje, White Beryl, f. 304a/b)
In the eighth chart, utilised for divinations concerning children, the following eight calculations are sequentially made: whether the chil-
dren's playground will be empty or not (byis-pa'i rtsed-ra stongs-ma stongs); whether the life-spirit of the child will be carried off by demons
or not (chung-bla 'dre-yis khyer-ma khyer); whether the fiery bow and arrow will break or not (me-mda' me-gzhu chag-ma chag); whether the



369
The thirty Chinese and Tibetan computational charts
citadel of the lifespan will crumble or not (tshe-srog mkhar-ba zhig-ma zhig); whether the dagger of the lifespan will be dislodged or not
(tshe-phur don-ma don); whether the gods and demons who beset the lifespan will descend or not (tshe-'dzin lha-bdud-du babs-ma babs);
whether the female spirits (ma-'dre) will play their dice-game or not (ma-'dre cho-lo 'gyed-mi 'gyed); and whether the treacherous spirits of
childhood (chung-sri) will arise or not (chung-sri langs-ma langs). Exemplary chart 10.10 has been prepared in respect of a subject born in
the fire dragon year.
10.10 Exemplary chart
wood v. fire = 0X
earth v. water = 00
wood v. iron =XX
earth v. fire = 00
earth v. water = 00
ear
Iron tiger
l
Iron hare
fire v. iron = 00
fire v. iron=00
earth v. fire = 0°C
Now, if the pebble placed in the first of these sectors is white, the pine tree of vitality will flourish and the children's playground will not
be empty; but if it is black, it portends that the playground will be empty and there will be few children. If the pebble placed in the second
sector is white there will be many children, but if it is black, it portends that rituals should be undertaken to promote the lifespan and ran-
som the life-spirit from death because it will be inauspicious. If the pebble placed in the third sector is white, it will be auspicious, but if it
is black the bow and arrow will be burnt, and one should persevere in virtuous acts. If the pebble placed in the fourth sector is white, it
will be auspicious, but if it is black it will be inauspicious for the lifespan in the long term. If the pebble placed in the fifth sector is white,
there will be long life free from disease, but if it is black a small child will be fatally injured. If the pebble placed in the sixth sector is white,
there will be longevity free from ill-health, protected by the lifelong companion gods ('go-lha), but if it is black the gods and demons will
descend to seize the lifespan, so that prayers and ablutions should be made, along with rites of reparation and confession. If the pebble
placed in the seventh sector is white, it will be auspicious, indicating harmony between mother and child. However, if it is black, it will be
inauspicious so that rites to avert the demons and imprecatory goddesses (ma-mo) who beset the living should be undertaken. Lastly, if
the pebble placed in the eighth sector is white, it will be easy to raise children, and there will be happiness. If it is black, however, rites
should be performed to exorcise the treacherous spirits of childhood (chung-sri). Lo-chen Dharmașrī summarises this chart as follows
(Moonbeams, f. 18b):
In the first [Tibetan computational chart named] 'five-pronged golden vajra',
Which is utilised for the divination concerning babies,
The calculation starts from the earth tiger and hare years,
[When the subject has the element wood)."
Plate 14, fig. 8 (Ms l: f. 1): Golden vajra (gser-gyi rdo-rje; utilised for divinations concerning children; White Beryl, f. 304a/b)
whether the citadel of the whether the dagger of the whether the gods and demons
lifespan will crumble or not lifespan will be dislodged or who beset the lifespan will descend
(tshe-srog mkhar-ba zhig-ma not (tshe-phur don-ma don) or not (tshe-'dzin Iha-bdud-du
zhig)
babs-ma babs)
whether the fiery bow and
FIVE-PRONGED
arrow will break or not (me-
GOLDEN VAJRA
whether the female spirits will play
their dice-game or not (ma-
'dre cho-lo 'gyed-mi 'gyed)
mda' me-gzhu chag-ma chag)
whether the life-spirit of the
whether the children's
whether the treacherous spirits of
child will be carried off by
demons or not (chung-bla
'dre-yis khyer-ma khyer
Plate 14, fig. 8
playground will be empty or
not (byis-pa'i rtsed-ra stongs-
ma stongs)
childhood will arise or not
(chung-sri langs-ma langs)
9. Talking parrot (smra-mkhan ne-tso, White Beryl, f. 304b)
In the ninth chart, utilised for divinations concerning young girls, the following eight calculations are sequentially made: whether the
spindling yard will be empty of woollen threads or not ('phong-ra'i bal-skud stongs ma-stongs); whether the radiance of the turquoise neck-
lace will fade or not (ske-gYu'i bkrag-mdangs yal ma-yal); whether the hollyhock will be blighted by frost or not (ha-lo sad-kyis khyer ma-
khyer); whether the silver-white mirror will be cracked or not (dngul-dkar me-long rdol ma-rdol); whether the splendour of brocade cloth-
ing will fade or not (dar-zab gos-kyi mdangs-dag yal ma-yal); whether the subject will be deprived of her gold and turquoise head
ornaments or not (gser-gYu'i mgo-rgyan bral ma-bral); whether the string of the conch necklace will be broken or not (dung-'phreng thag-
pa chad ma-chad), and whether the eye of the neck-ornament will be damaged or not (ske-rgyan 'phrul-mig bol ma-bol). Exemplary chart
10.11 has been prepared in respect of a subject born in the fire dragon year.
10.11 Exemplary chart
wood v. water = 0
wood v. wood =X
earth v. earth = 0
earth v. earth = 0
Water dragon
earth v. earth = 0
Water snake
fire v. water =XX
fire v. water =XX
earth v. wood =XX
Now, if the pebble placed in the first of these sectors is white, it will be auspicious; but if it is black, it portends that there will be
unwanted sorrows in the sectors of ill-health and elderly maternal relatives. If the pebble placed in the second sector is white, the



370
The White Beryl
subject will remember her parents' kindness with great gratitude. If it is black, however, it portends frailty and ill-health, but one
should persevere with specific ritual charms (gto). If the pebble placed in the third sector is white, it will be auspicious, but if it is
black there will be defamation and obstacles, for which reason ritual services should be undertaken. If the pebble placed in the fourth
sector is white the mirror will be uncracked, but if it is black it will be inauspicious for males. If the pebble placed in the fifth sector
is white, there will be good auspices in the sector of the father and brother (pha-ming), but if it is black this same sector will be inauspi-
cious, requiring special rites to be performed. If the pebble placed in the sixth sector is white, it will be auspicious, but if it is black,
the subject will be befriended by her parents for only a short time, and it will be inauspicious for lasting friendships. However, appro-
priate rites of aversion may help. If the pebble placed in the seventh sector is white, it will be auspicious, but if it is black it will be
inauspicious for the lifespan. Lastly, if the pebble placed in the eighth sector is white all will be well, but if it is black it will be inauspi-
cious for elderly female relatives, requiring perseverance in rites of aversion. Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises this chart as follows
(Moonbeams, f. 18b):
In the second [Tibetan computational chart named] 'talking parrot',
Which is utilised for the divination concerning young girls,
The calculation starts from the iron dragon and iron snake years,
[When the subject has the element wood). 16
00
Plate 14, fig. 9 (Ms I:f. 1): Talking parrot (smra-mkhan ne-tso, utilised for divinations concerning young girls; White Beryl, f. 304b)
whether the silver white mirror whether the splendour of the whether the subject will be deprived
will be cracked or not (dngul- brocade clothing will fade or of her gold and turquoise head
dkar me-long rdol ma-rdo) not (dar-zab gos-kyi mdangs ornaments or not (gser-gyu'i
dag yal ma-ya)
mgo-rgyan bral ma-bra)
whether the hollyhock will be
whether the string of the conch
blighted by frost or not (ha-lo
TALKING PARROT necklace will be broken or not
sad-kyis khyer ma-khyer)
(dung- 'phreng thag-pa chad
000000
con
000
ma-chad)
whether the radiance of the
whether the spindling yard will
whether the clasp of the waistbelt
Plate 14, fig. 9
turquoise necklace will fade or
be empty of woollen threads or
will be slack or not (ske-rgyan
not (ske-gYu'i bkrag-mdangs
not ('phang-ra'i bal-skud stongs
'phrul-mig bol ma-bo)
yal ma-ya)
ma-stongs)
10. Nine-sectored palace (pho-brang gling-dgu, White Beryl, ff. 3046–305a)
In the tenth chart, utilised for divinations concerning retainers, subjects and servants, the following eight calculations are sequentially
made: whether the bow and its five arrows will be lost or not (mda'-lnga gzhu-gcig shor ma-shor); whether servants will be deceived by
demons or not (bran-gYog bdud-kyis bslus ma-bslus); whether close friends will become inimical thieves or not (zla-grogs mtshang-rkun byed
mi-byed); whether the yoke of misfortune can be borne or not (byur-gyi gnya'-shing 'khur mi-'khur); whether the mountain of misfortune
will be borne or not (byur-ri phang-pa-yis 'degs mi-'degs); whether the blackest of misfortunes can be borne or not (byur-rkyal nag-po 'khur
mi-'khur); whether the pathways of misfortune can be trodden or not (byur-lam nag-po 'grim mi-'grim); and whether the discord of female
demons will ingress or not (bdud-mo'i dbyen-kha zhugs ma-zhugs). Exemplary chart 10.12 has been prepared in respect of a subject born in
the fire dragon year.
10.12 Exemplary chart
earth v. wood =XX
wood v. fire = 0X
wood v. iron =XX
earth v. iron = 0x
earth v. fire = 000
Wood horse
Wood sheep
fire v. wood = 000
fire v. wood = 0
earth v. earth = 0
Now, if the pebble placed in the first of these sectors is white, it will be auspicious; but if it is black, the subjects and retainers will be dis-
cordant and blood feuds will ensue. If the pebble placed in the second sector is white it will be auspicious, but if it is black, it portends that
intimate thoughts might be disclosed. If the pebble placed in the third sector is white, servants and retainers will prosper, but if it is black,
friends may be bribed. If the pebble placed in the fourth sector is white, merits and wealth will increase. If it is black, however, it will be
inauspicious, so that rites to promote prosperity should be undertaken. If the pebble placed in the fifth sector is white, it will be auspi-
cious, but if it is black, rituals to counter misfortune and promote prosperity should be undertaken. If the pebble placed in the sixth sector
is white, all will be well, but if it is black, human misfortunes will fall upon the subject. If the pebble placed in the seventh sector is white,
all will be well, but if it is black, there will be various false accusations. Lastly, if the pebble placed in the eighth sector is white, the female
demons will not ingress, but if it is black, they will provoke discord and deplete wealth. Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises this chart as fol-
lows (Moonbeams, f. 18b):
In the third [Tibetan computational chart named) 'nine-sectored palace',
Which is utilised for the divination concerning retainers, subjects and servants,
The calculation starts from the water horse and water sheep years,
[When the subject has the element wood)."



371
The thirty Chinese and Tibetan computational charts
Plate 14, fig. 10 (Ms I: f. 1): Nine-sectored palace (pho-brang gling-dgu, utilised for divinations concerning retainers, subjects and servants; White Beryl, ff. 304b-305a)
whether the yoke of misfortune whether the mountain of whether the blackest of
can be borne or not (byur-gyi
misfortune will be borne or not
misfortunes can be borne or not
gnya'-shing 'khur mi-'khun)
(byur-ri phang-pa-yis 'degs
(byur-rkyal nag-po 'khur mi-'khun)
mi-'degs)
whether close friends will
whether the pathways of
NINE-SECTORED PALACE
misfortune can be trodden or not
become inimical thieves or not
(zla-grogs mtshang-rkun byed
(byur-lam nag-po'grim mi-'grim)
mi-byed
Plate 14, fig. 10
whether servants will be
whether the bow and its five
whether the discord of female
deceived by demons or not
arrows will be lost or not (mda'-
demons will ingress or not
(bran-gYog bdud-kyis bslus
Inga gzhu-gcig shor ma-shor)
(bdud-mo'i dbyen-kha zhugs
ma-bslus)
ma-zhugs)
11. Supreme horse (rta-mchog rin-cherr, White Beryl, f. 305a/b)
In the eleventh chart, utilised for divinations concerning horses, donkeys and mules, the following eight calculations are sequentially
made: whether the golden bridle will slip from the mouth or not (gser-srab kha-nas shor ma-shor); whether the agate tethering peg will be dis-
lodged or not (mchod-phur gnam-du yar ma-yar); whether the golden saddle will slip down or not (gser-sga rbab-tu lhung ma-lhung); whether
the hairs of the mane will fall out or not (ltag-tshar spu-ni bud ma-bud); whether the turquoise halter will become loose or not (gYu-mthur a-
lung bol ma-bol); whether the ornate saddle carpet will slide backwards or not (rta-rgyan rgyab-nas bud ma-bud); whether the mane and tail of
the thoroughbred steed ('do-chen) will sag or not ('do-chen ze-mjug zags ma-zags), and whether the horse's neck ornaments will be stolen or
not (dom-dom rkun-mas brkus ma-brkus). Exemplary chart 10.13 has been prepared in respect of a subject born in the fire dragon year.
10.13 Exemplary chart
wood v. water = 000
earth v. fire = 0x
earth v. water = 00
wood v. wood = X
Fire monkey
earth v. wood =XX
Fire bird
fire v. fire = X
fire v. fire = X
earth v. iron = 0x
Now, if the pebble placed in the first of these sectors is white, the ancestral horse herds will thrive; but if it is black it will be inauspicious.
If the pebble placed in the second sector is white, the lifespan of a stallion will be secure. If it is black, however, it will be inauspicious. If
the pebble placed in the third sector is white, it will be auspicious, but if it is black, king spirits will always afflict the horses, therefore a
horse effigy and king spirit thread-cross should be cast out. If the pebble placed in the fourth sector is white, it will be auspicious, but if it
is black, prosperity and good luck will be diminished, for which reason the gYang-skyabs which promotes the good luck of horses should
be recited. If the pebble placed in the fifth sector is white, it will be auspicious, and if it is black, all will be well for white and bay horses but
it will be inauspicious for roans. If the pebble placed in the sixth sector is white, it will be auspicious, but if it is black the saddle-carpet will
slip off, and one will ride bareback, for which reason the dhāraṇī for horses should be recited and a horse effigy made. If the pebble placed
in the seventh sector is white it will be auspicious, but if it is black, one should beware of diseases. Lastly, if the pebble placed in the eighth
sector is white all will be well, but if it is black the good luck of the horse will diminish, requiring the ritual which attracts good luck for
horses to be performed. Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises this chart as follows (Moonbeams, ff. 186–19a):
In the fourth [Tibetan computational chart named] 'precious supreme horse',
Which is utilised for the divination concerning horses, donkeys and mules,
The calculation starts from the wood bird and wood monkey years,
[When the subject has the element wood). 18
Plate 14, fig. 11 (Ms l: f. 1): Supreme horse (rta-mchog rin-chen, utilised for divinations concerning horses, donkeys and mules; White Beryl, f. 305a/b)
3
whether the hairs of the mane
whether the turquoise halter
whether the ornate saddle carpet
SON
will fall out or not (Itag-tshar
will slip off or not (rta-rgyan
will become loose or not
(gYu-mthur a-lung bol ma-bol)
rgyab-nas bud ma-bud)
spu-ni bud ma-bud)
whether the golden saddle will
whether the 'do-chen steed's mane
SUPREME HORSE
and tail will sag or not ('do-chen
slip down or not (gser-sga
rbab-tu lhung ma-lhung)
ze-mjug zags ma-zags)
whether the agate tethering peg
will be dislodged or not
whether the golden bridle will whether the horse's neck ornaments
slip from the mouth or not (gser- will be stolen or not (dom-dom
srab kha-nas shor ma-shor) rkun-mas brkus ma-brkus)
(mchong-phur gnam-du yar
Plate 14, fig. 11
ma-yar)
12. [Blue-horned] wild yak of the north (byang-kha'i 'brong-chung, White Beryl, ff. 305b-306a)
In the twelfth chart, utilised for divinations concerning animals with cleft hooves, the following eight calculations are sequentially made:
whether the flanks of the divine yak will sag down or not (lha-gYag dkar-po 'dabs-nas zags ma-zags); whether the good luck of the divine
grey 'bri will diminish or not (lha-'bri zil-gYang nyams ma-nyams); whether the line of prosperous sheep will be broken or not (gYang-lug
star-thag chad ma-chad); whether the ogre-like goats will be pursued by jackals and wolves or not (srin-ra 'phar-spyang-gis ded ma-ded);



372
The White Beryl
whether the milch cows will be dry or not ('dod-'jo'i ba-mo bskams ma-bskams); whether the golden nose-ring of the turquoise hybrid cow
will be cast off or not (gYu-mdzo'i gser-sna bud ma-bud); whether the curd container will leak or not (zho-zom zhabs-nas rdol ma-rdol); and
whether the butter of prosperity will be spilled or not (gYang-mar rbab-la shor ma-shor). Exemplary chart 10.14 has been prepared in
respect of a subject born in the fire dragon year.
10.14 Exemplary chart
wood v. fire = 0X
earth v. earth = 0
earth v. earth = 0
wood v. iron =XX
Earth dog
earth v. water = 00
Earth pig
fire v. earth = 0X
fire v. earth = 0X
earth v. fire = 0%
Now, if the pebble placed in the first of these sectors is white, it will be auspicious; but if it is black, it portends that wealth will be squan-
dered as it is made – but it will help if the nor-phyugs-kyi gta'-sdoms rite is performed to attract good luck. If the pebble placed in the second
sector is white it will be auspicious for riding steers (bzhon-phyogs), but if it is black, cattle will be lost and prosperity diminished.
Therefore, rites and recitations should be undertaken to protect good luck and prosperity. If the pebble placed in the third sector is white,
it will be auspicious, but if it is black the good luck of sheep will diminish, requiring the recitation of the dhāraṇīfor sheep and the casting
out of a sheep effigy. If the pebble placed in the fourth sector is white, goats will thrive, but if it is black it will be inauspicious in that goats
are pursued by jackals and wolves, requiring goat effigies to be made, and carried to all directions, particularly the west. If the pebble
placed in the fifth sector is white, it will be auspicious for food, property, treasuries and resources, but if it is black, the milk will come to
an end, and the milch cows will shortly die. However, the outcome will be auspicious if the rites for attracting the good luck of cows are
performed. If the pebble placed in the sixth sector is white, it will be auspicious, but if it is black, it will be inauspicious. If the pebble
placed in the seventh sector is white, it indicates good auspices in that the curd will not be carried off by demons. If it is black, however,
these demons will ingress and require purification. Lastly, if the pebble placed in the eighth sector is white, it will be auspicious, indicat-
ing that the lumps of butter are not spilled. If it is black, however, good luck will diminish, and rites must be performed to reverse this.
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises this chart as follows (Moonbeams, f. 19a):
In the fifth [Tibetan computational chart named) 'blue-horned wild yak of the north',
Which is utilised for the divination concerning animals with cleft hooves,
The calculation starts from the fire dog and fire pig years,
[When the subject has the element wood). 19
Plate 14, fig. 12 (Ms I:f. 1): [Blue-horned] Wild yak of the north (byang-kha'i 'brong-chung, utilised for divinations concerning animals with cleft hooves; White Beryl, ff. 3055–306a)
whether the ogre-like goats will whether the milch cows will be whether the golden nose-ring of
be pursued by jackals and dry or not ('dod-'jo'i ba-mo the turquoise hybrid cow will be
wolves or not (srin-ra 'phar- bskams ma-bskams) cast off or not (gYu-mdzo'i gser-
spyang-gis ded ma-ded)
sna bud ma-bud)
whether the line of prosperous
whether the curd container will
sheep will be broken or not
BLUE-HORNED WILD YAK
leak or not (zho-zom zhabs-nas
(gYang-lug star-thag chad
OF THE NORTH
rdol ma-rdol
IND
ma-chad)
ACTA
whether the good luck of the
whether the flanks of the divine
whether the butter of prosperity will
Plate 14. fig. 12
divine 'bri will diminish or not
yak will sag down or not (Iha-
gYag dkar-po 'dabs-nas zags
be spilled or not (gYang-mar rbab
la shor ma-shor)
(Iha-'bri-zil gyang nyams
ma-nyams)
ma-zags)
13. Golden [treasure] vase (gser-gyi bum-pa; White Beryl, f. 306a/b)
In the thirteenth chart, utilised for divinations concerning compatible spouses, the following eight calculations are sequentially made:
whether the vase of longevity will slip from the hand or not (bza'-mi gnyis-kyi lag-nas tshe-yi bum-pa shor ma-shor); whether the flow of the
water of life will be interrupted or not (tshe-chu rked-pa chad ma-chad); whether one will be engulfed by the darkness of hatred or not (zhe-
sdang rum-du zhugs ma-zhugs); whether one will be tainted by bad reputation or not (mi-khas 'du-bral byed mi-byed); whether contaminated
food will be consumed or not (zas-log-khong-du song ma-song); whether the mountain of suffering must be scaled or not (sdug-gi ri-bo 'dzeg
mi-'dzeg); whether the way back will be blocked or not (slar-log rgya-yis btab ma-btab); and whether treacherous spirits of childhood
(chung-sri) ingress through the cervix or not (chung-sri mngal-sgor zhugs ma-zhugs). Exemplary chart 10.15 has been prepared in respect
of a subject born in the fire dragon year.
10.15 Exemplary chart
wood v. water = 000
wood v. wood = X
earth v. iron = 0x
earth v. wood =XX
Iron mouse
earth v. iron = 0x
Iron ox
fire v. iron=00
fire v. iron=00
earth v. water =00
Now, if the pebble placed in the first of these sectors is white, it will be auspicious; but if it is black, it portends that the vitality element
will suddenly be exposed to obstacles, and the rite for attainment of longevity (tshe-sgrub) should be performed. If the pebble placed in the



373
The thirty Chinese and Tibetan computational charts
second sector is white it will be auspicious, but if it is black, it portends that the marital friendship will be short-lived, but it will help if the
specified recitations are made. If the pebble placed in the third sector is white, the spouses will be compatible and loving; if it is black,
however, one should beware a previous unhappy outcome. If the pebble placed in the fourth sector is white it will be auspicious; and if it is
black, rampant rumours should be contained. If the pebble placed in the fifth sector is white, it will be auspicious, but if it is black it will be
inauspicious for food, medicine and cooked dishes. If the pebble placed in the sixth sector is white, it will be auspicious for the provider,
but if it is black there will be sorrows, divorce and loss of hair, requiring counteractive rites and recitations to be made. If the pebble
placed in the seventh sector is white, it will be auspicious, but if it is black there will be wrong turnings and hardships, which can be borne
if the parental grandparents and other relatives move abroad. Lastly, if the pebble placed in the eighth sector is white, children will
thrive, but if it is black, children will be isolated and die accidentally, so it will be important to exorcise the treacherous spirits of child-
hood (chung-sri). Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises this chart as follows (Moonbeams, f. 19a):
In the sixth [Tibetan computational chart named) 'treasure vase',
Which is utilised for the divination concerning compatible spouses,
The calculation starts from the earth mouse and earth ox years,
[When the subject has the element wood). 20
Plate 14, fig. 13 (Msi: f. 1): Golden (treasure] vase (gser-gyi bum-pa; utilised for divinations concerning compatible spouses; White Beryl, f. 306a/b)
whether one will be tainted by whether contaminated food will whether the mountain of suffering
bad reputation or not (mi-khas be consumed or not (zas-log must be scaled or not (sdug-gi
'du-bral byed mi-byed) khong-du song ma-song) ri-bo 'dzeg mi-'dzeg)
whether one will be engulfed
whether the way back will be
by the darkness of hatred or GOLDEN (TREASURE) VASE blocked or not (slar-log rgya-yis
not (zhe-sdang rum-du zhugs
btab ma-btab)
ma-zhugs)
whether the flow of the water
whether the vase of longevity
whether treacherous spirits of
childhood ingress through the
of life will be interrupted or
will slip from the hand or not
Plate 14, fig. 13
not (tshe-chu rked-pa chad
(bza'-mi gnyis-kyi lag-nas tshe
-yi bum-pa shor ma-shor)
cervix or not (chung-sri mngal-
Sgor zhugs ma-zhugs)
ma chad
14. Peacocks (with crossed necks] (rgya-yi rma-bya, White Beryl, f. 306b-307a)
In the fourteenth chart, utilised for divinations concerning the time for marriage and the bride's departure, the following eight calcula-
tions are sequentially made: whether the mountain of the bride's destiny will be burnt by the fire of existence or not (bag-ma'i dbang-ri
srid-pa'i me-la shor ma-shor); whether the direction of the bride's departure will be mistaken or not (bag-ma'i 'gro-phyogs-rnams log-gam
ma-log); whether the radiance of the gold and turquoise ornaments will fade or not (gser-gYu'i bkrag-mdangs yal ma-yal); whether the bro-
cade pelmets will droop downwards or not (dar-zab sham-bu zags ma-zags); whether the hill of the elder brother, behind the scene, will be
auspicious or not (pha-ming rgyab-ri bzang mi-bzang); whether an excellent house will be constructed at the domicile or not ('dug-sar dpal-
khyim phub ma-phub); whether their excellent food will be acquired by an enemy or not (dpal-zas dgra-la shor ma-shor); and whether empty
rumours will be spread or not (mi-khas stong-gleng byas ma-bya). Exemplary chart 10.16 has been prepared in respect of a subject born in
the fire dragon year.
10.16 Exemplary chart
wood v. fire= 0x
earth v. water = 00
earth v. fire = 0°C
earth v. fire = 000
wood v. iron=XX
Water tiger
Water hare
fire v. water =XX
fire v. water =XX
earth v. earth = 0
Now, if the pebble placed in the first of these sectors is white, it will be auspicious; but if it is black, it portends sorrows and great dangers in
the sector of the elder brother, and consequently specific rites should be performed. If the pebble placed in the second sector is white, it will
be auspicious because the direction of the bride's departure will not harm the goddesses of the snow peaks (bstan-ma). If it is black, how-
ever, it portends the reverse. If the pebble placed in the third sector is white, all will be well, but if it is black, demons will beset the bride. If
the pebble placed in the fourth sector is white, it will be auspicious, but if it is black it will be inauspicious for both the bride and the house-
holder. If the pebble placed in the fifth sector is white, the background hill symbolising the elder brother will not crumble, but if it is black,
the hill will crumble, the elder brother will decline and there will be little benefit, therefore rites that secure the vitality element should be
undertaken. If the pebble placed in the sixth sector is white, it will be auspicious for the domicile, but if it is black it will be inauspicious
because no excellent house will be built. Therefore, rites exorcising misfortune and promoting prosperity should be undertaken. If the
pebble placed in the seventh sector is white, it will be auspicious, but if it is black it will be inauspicious as the subject's share of food will be
lost to an enemy, particularly in the latter part of life. An appropriate protective amulet should be worn. Lastly, if the pebble placed in the
eighth sector is white there will be no doubts arising from ill rumour, but ifit is black such rumours will be rife, requiring the performance
of rites which exorcise and avert rumours and bad reputation. Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises this chart as follows (Moonbeams, f. 19a):
In the seventh [Tibetan computational chart named] 'peacocks' crossed necks',
Which is utilised for the divination concerning the bride's departure,
The calculation starts from the iron tiger and hare years (when the subject has the element wood). 21



374
The White Beryl
Plate 14, fig. 14 (Ms I:f. 1): Peacocks with crossed necks (rgya-yi rma-bya; utilised for divinations concerning the time for marriage and the bride's departure; White Beryl, f. 306–307a)
TUMA
whether the brocade pelmets
whether the hill of the elder
whether an excellent house will be
will droop downwards or not
brother, behind the scene, will
be auspicious or not (pha-ming
constructed at the domicile or not
('dug-sar dpal-khyim phub ma-phub)
(dar-zab sham-bu zags
ma-zags)
rgyab-ri bzang mi-bzang)
whether the radiance of the
whether their excellent food will be
gold and turquoise ornaments
PEACOCKS
acquired by an enemy or not (dpal
will fade or not (gser-gYu'i
[WITH CROSSED NECKS]
zas dgra-la shor ma-shor)
bkrag-mdangs yal ma-ya)
Plate 14, fig. 14
whether the direction of the
whether the mountain of the
whether empty rumours will be
bride's departure will be
bride's destiny will be burnt
spread or not (mi-khas stong-gleng
byas ma-bya)
by the fire of existence or not
mistaken or not (bag-ma'i
'gro-phyogs-rnams log
gam ma-log)
(bag ma'i dbang-ri srid-pa'i
me-la shor-ma-shor)
15. Chinese temple roof (garuda gargoyle] (Iha-khang rgya-phibs, White Beryl, f. 307a/b)
In the fifteenth chart, utilised for divinations concerning households and land, the following eight calculations are sequentially made:
whether the turquoise-coloured hen will ascend the silver pathway from the north or not (gYu-yi bya-de byang-nas dngul-lam zhugs ma-
zhugs); whether a royal palace will be built in the north-east or not (byang-shar rgyal-po'i pho-brang btab ma-btab); whether a temple will be
surmounted by a garuda gargoyle in the east or not (shar-nas lha-khang khyung-mgos non ma-non); whether a demonic black whirlwind will
arise from the south-east or not (shar-lho-nas bdud-rlung nag-po langs ma-langs); whether the tree of prosperity will flourish or not on a
mountain in the south (lho-nas ri-la gYang-shing rgyas ma-rgyas); whether the sunny and shady sides of the valley will be reversed from
the south-west or not (lho-nub-nas gdags-sribs phyogs-ni log ma-log); whether the black pathway to death will open or not from the west
(nub-nas gshin-lam nag-po bye ma-bye); and whether worms will or will not creep as far as the neck from the north-west (rlung-nas sa-srin
gnya'-yan-gyi 'dur ma-'dur). Exemplary chart 10.17 has been prepared in respect of a subject born in the fire dragon year.
10.17 Exemplary chart
wood v. water = 0%
wood v. wood = X
earth v. earth = 0
earth v. earth = 0
Wood dragon
earth v. wood =XX
Wood snake
fire v. earth = 000
fire v. earth = 000
thlon
earth v. iron = 0X
Now, if the pebble placed in the first of these sectors is white, it will be auspicious for the household; but if it is black and the hen runs down-
wards, it portends great inauspices in the household sector. If the pebble placed in the second sector is white it will be auspicious because no
palace will be built in the north-east. Ifit is black, however, it portends the reverse, and so specified rites should be undertaken and specified
thread-crosses made. If the pebble placed in the third sector is white, it will be auspicious, but if it is black the reverse will apply, requiring
positive rites to be undertaken. If the pebble placed in the fourth sector is white, all will be well, but if it is black it will be inauspicious, and
stūpas or temples should be built. If the pebble placed in the fifth sector is white, it will be auspicious, but if it is black it will be inauspicious
and can only be slightly ameliorated by performing protective rites which attract good luck and prosperity. If the pebble placed in the sixth
sector is white, all will be well, but if it is black, the reversal of sun and shade will be inauspicious for land-owners and householders. If the
pebble placed in the seventh sector is white, it will be auspicious because the pathway of death will not open from the west. If it is black,
however, it will be inauspicious for children, requiring special rites to be performed. Lastly, if the pebble placed in the eighth sector is
white, all will be well, but if it is black, the earthworms will reach the neck of the deceased, indicating that the tomb will be exposed.
Appropriate rites of aversion and exorcism should be performed. Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises this chart as follows (Moonbeams, f. 18a):
In the eighth [Chinese computational chart named] 'temple roof garuda gargoyle',
Which is utilised for the divination concerning households and land,
The calculation starts from the water dragon and snake years [when the subject has the element wood]. 22
Plate 14, fig. 15 (Ms I:f. 1): Chinese temple roof (garuda gargoyle) (Iha-khang rgya-phibs; utilised for divinations concerning households and land; White Beryl, f. 307a/b)
whether a demonic black
whether the tree of prosperity
whether the sunny and shady sides
whirlwind will arise from the
will flourish or not on a mountain
of the valley will be reversed from
south-east or not (me-nas bdud- in the south (Iho-nas ri-la gyang- the south-west or not (Iho-nub-nas
rlung nag-po langs ma-langs)
shing rgyas ma-rgyas)
gdags-sribs phyogs-ni log ma-log)
whether a temple will be sur-
whether the black pathway to death
mounted by a garuda gargoyle
CHINESE TEMPLE ROOF
will open or not from the west
in the east or not (shar-nas lha-
(GARUDA GARGOYLE]
(nub-nas gshin-lam nag-po bye
khang khyung-mgos non ma-non)
ma-bye)
whether a royal palace will be
whether the turquoise-coloured
whether worms will or will not creep
built in the north-east or not
hen will ascend the silver
as far as the neck from the north-
Plate 14, fig. 15
(byang-shar rgyal-po'i pho-
pathway from the north or not
west (rlung-nas sa-srin gnya'-yan-
brang btab ma-btab)
(gYu-yi bya-de byang-nas
gyi 'dur ma-'dur)
dngul-lam zhugs ma-zhugs)



375
The thirty Chinese and Tibetan computational charts
16. Eight-sectored golden estate (gling-brgyad gser-gyi sa-gzhi, White Beryl, f. 307b)
In the sixteenth chart, utilised for divinations concerning good and bad estates, the following eight calculations are sequentially made;
whether the estate will be secure, and of good or bad quality (gzhi-de brling-zhing bzang mi-bzang); whether trees will flourish or not on
the mountain of excellent merit (bzang-ri-la ljon-shing rgyas mi rgyas); whether the geomantic survey of castles and houses is of good or
bad quality (mkhar-khang sa-dmigs bzang mi-bzang); whether the growth of grain will be abundant or not ('bru-yi skye-'khrungs rgyas mi-
rgyas); whether there will be a geomantic clash between rock and mountain or not (sgron-brag sgron-ri 'thab mi-'thab); whether sunbeams
will be cut off by a mountain or not (nyi-lam ri-yis chod ma-chod); whether vales of clover will be swept away or not (srad-lung phyags-ma-
yis btab ma-btab); and whether the sunny and shady sides of the valley will be reversed or not (gdags-sribs phyogs-ni log ma-log). Exemplary
chart 10.18 has been prepared in respect of a subject born in the fire dragon year.
10.18 Exemplary chart
wood v. fire = 0 x
earth v.wood =XX
earth v. iron = 0x
wood v. iron = XX
Fire horse
earth v. earth = 0
Fire sheep
fire v. fire =X
fire v. fire = X
earth v. wood = XX
Now, if the pebble placed in the first of these sectors is white, the estate will be secure and there will be extensive merits; butifit is black, it will
be inauspicious, requiring rituals to promote merit. If the pebble placed in the second sector is white, the trees of food and property will
flourish on the mountain of merit; but if it is black, the trees of good resource will wither and it will be inauspicious for the sector of merit. If
the pebble placed in the third sector is white, the geomantic survey will be excellent, enhancing merits and wealth; but ifit is black the survey
will be inauspicious for the household, so that ritual charms (gto) pertaining to the spirit lords of the soil should be offered. Ifthe pebble placed
in the fourth sector is white, the agricultural land will be excellent for growing grain. However, if it is black the land will produce grains of
poor quality. If the pebble placed in the fifth sector is white, there will be no geomantic clash of rock and mountain; but ifitis black, merits will
be reduced somewhat, and it will help if a stūpa is constructed. If the pebble placed in the sixth sector is white, it will be auspicious, but if it is
black, the interruption of the sunbeams will generate hostilities against older women, and there will be poverty. If the pebble placed in the
seventh sector is white, it will be auspicious since the clover will not be swept away, but ifit is black, it will be inauspicious for food and prop-
erty. Lastly, if the pebble placed in the eighth sector is white, it will be auspicious, but if it is black it will be the reverse, so that the door
should face the subject's room or that of the subject's mother. Lo-chen Dharmasrī summarises this chart as follows (Moonbeams, f. 18a):
In the ninth (Chinese computational chart named] ‘household entrance',
Which is utilised for the divination concerning good and bad estates,
The calculation starts from the wood horse and wood sheep years,
[When the subject has the element wood].23
Plate 14, fig. 16 (Ms l: f. 2): Eight-sectored golden estate (gling-brgyad gser-gyi sa-gzhi, utilised for divinations concerning good and bad estates; White Beryl, f. 307b)
whether the growth of grain will whether there will be a whether sunbeams will be cut off by
be abundant or not ('bru-yi geomantic clash between rock a mountain or not (nyi-lam ri-yis
skye-'khrungs rgyas mi-rgyas) and mountain or not (sgron- chod ma-chod)
brag sgron-ri 'thab mi-'thab)
whether the geomantic survey
whether vales of clover will be
of castles and houses is of
EIGHT-SECTORED
swept away or not (srad-lung phyags
GOLDEN ESTATE
ma-yis btab ma-btab)
good or bad quality (mkhar-
khang sa-dmigs bzang
mi-bzang)
whether trees will flourish or
whether the estate will be
whether the sunny and shady sides
not on the mountain of
of the valley will be reversed or not
secure, and of good or bad
quality (gzhi-de brling-zhing
bzang mi-bzang)
(gdags-sribs phyogs-ni log ma-log)
excellent merit (bzang-ri-la
ljon-shing rgyas mi rgyas)
Plate 14, fig. 16
17. Fiery (wish-fulfilling) gemstone (rin-chen 'od-'bar, White Beryl, ff. 307b-308a)
In the seventeenth chart, utilised for divinations concerning armour, copper household artefacts, and so forth, the following eight calcu-
lations are sequentially made: whether the treasury will be filled with gold, silver and riches or not (bang-mdzod phugs gser-dngul nor-gyis
khengs mi-khengs); whether the house will be excellent or not (khang-pa bzang mi-bzang); whether the silk cushion will be high or not (dar-
khri mtho mi-mtho); whether the lake of butter will be intact or not (mar-mtsho 'khyil ma-'khyil); whether the mountain of cheesecake will be
piled high or not (thud-ri spungs ma-spungs); whether the slate mountain of meat will crumble or not (sha'i rdza nyil ma-nyil); whether the
wine jar will leak or not (chang-rdza rdol ma-rdol); and whether the balls of roasted barley flour (tsam-pa) will roll down or not (zan-rbab
shor ma-shor). Exemplary chart 10.19 has been prepared in respect of a subject born in the fire dragon year.
10.19 Exemplary chart
wood v. water = 000
wood v. wood =X
earth v. water = 00
earth v. fire = 0 0
Earth monkey
Earth bird
earth v. iron = 0x
fire v. earth=0X
fire v. earth = 0x
earth v. water = 00



376
The White Beryl
Now, if the pebble placed in the first of these sectors is white, the treasury will be filled with gold, silver and riches, so that it will be
auspicious; but if it is black, it will be inauspicious for the sector of wealth and gemstones. If the pebble placed in the second sector
is white, it will be auspicious in that the house will be endowed with lustrous gemstones; but if it is black, it portends there will be no
lustrous gemstones, auguring ill for the sector of castles and the sector of dominion. If the pebble placed in the third sector is white,
the cushion will be high and it will be auspicious; but if it is black, the seat will be low and one should persevere with ritual services. If
the pebble placed in the fourth sector is white, it will be auspicious, but if it is black the lake of butter will evaporate and it will be
inauspicious. If the pebble placed in the fifth sector is white, it will be auspicious, but if it is black the mountain of cheesecake will sub-
side and it will be inauspicious. If the pebble placed in the sixth sector is white, it will be auspicious for the sector of dairy products, but
if it is black the slate mountain of meat will crumble and it will be inauspicious for livestock. If the pebble placed in the seventh sector
is white, it will be auspicious, but if it is black, materials and resources will be exhausted. Lastly, if the pebble placed in the eighth sector
is white, all will be well, but if it is black it will be inauspicious for food and wealth in the latter part of one's life. Therefore,
appropriate burnt offerings and protective rites that attract good luck should be undertaken to ameliorate the situation. Lo-
chen Dharmaśrī summarises this chart as follows (Moonbeams, f. 18a):
In the tenth [Chinese computational chart named 'wish-fulfilling gem',
Which is utilised for the divination concerning armour and copper cooking pots,
The calculation starts from the fire monkey and fire bird years,
[When the subject has the element wood). 24
Plate 14, fig. 17 (Msi: f. 2): Fiery [wish-fulfilling) gemstone (rin-chen 'od-'bar, utilised for divinations concerning armour, copper household artefacts and so forth; White Beryl, ff. 307b-308a)
whether the lake of butter will
whether the mountain of
whether the slate mountain of meat
OH
be intact or not (mar-mtsho
cheesecake will be piled high or
will crumble or not (sha'i rdza
'khyil ma-'khyi)
not (thud-ri spungs ma-spungs)
nyil ma-nyi)
US
whether the silk cushion will
whether the wine jar will leak or not
RE1
be high or not (dar-khri mtho
FIERY [WISH-FULFILLING] GEM
(chang-rdza rdol ma-rdo)
mi-mtho)
whether the house will be
excellent or not (khang-pa
whether the treasury will be
filled with gold, silver and riches
or not (bang-mdzod phugs gser
-dngul nor-gyis khengs
mi-khengs)
whether the balls of roasted barley
flour will roll down or not (zan-rbab
shor ma-shor)
bzang mi-bzang)
Plate 14, fig. 17
18. Leafy tree [and spring] (ljon-shing 'dab-rgyas, White Beryl, f. 308a/b)
In the eighteenth chart, utilised for divinations concerning childbirth, the following eight calculations are sequentially made: whether
the spring of existence will become dry or not (srid-chu bskams ma-bskams); whether the dagger of existence will be dislodged or not (srid-
phur gnam-la yar ma-yar); whether the demons of water and fire will cause affliction or not (me='dre chu-'dre gnod mi-gnod); whether the
malign goblins (the'u-brang) and attachment spirits (bsen-mo) will act against sons and husbands or not (the-bsen bu-khyo byed mi-byed);
whether the ocean of existence will remain intact or not (srid-kyi rgya-mtsho 'khyil ma-'khyil); whether king spirits and attachment spirits
will perpetually cause harm or not (rgyal-bsen rgyun-du gnod mi-gnod); whether the zhang-'dre spirits will cause affliction from the west or
not (nub-nas zhang-'dre gnod mi-gnod); and whether malign goblins and attachment spirits will ingress through the cervix or not (the-bsen
mngal-sgor zhugs ma-zhugs). Exemplary chart 10.20 has been prepared in respect of a subject born in the fire dragon year.
10.20 Exemplary chart
wood v. fire = 0X
earth v. earth = 0
earth v. earth = 0
earth v. fire = 0°C
wood v. iron=XX
Iron dog
Iron pig
fire v. iron=00
fire v. iron=00
earth v. earth = 0
Now, if the pebble placed in the first of these sectors is white, it will be auspicious; but if it is black, it portends that the spring of exis-
tence will evaporate, and it will be inauspicious for all female retainers, requiring appropriate protective amulets to be worn. If the peb-
ble placed in the second sector is white, it will be auspicious; but if it is black, the dagger of existence will be dislodged, making it
difficult to raise children, and it will help if rites securing existence are undertaken, along with the thrusting of the ritual dagger. If
the pebble placed in the third sector is white, it will be auspicious; but if it is black, the demons of water and fire will cause their afflic-
tions, making it inauspicious for human beings and property. If the pebble placed in the fourth sector is white, all will be well; but if it
is black, the malign goblins (the'u-brang) and attachment spirits (bsen-mo) will ingress into the womb, for which reason it will be inauspi-
cious for children, and appropriate ritual services should be performed. If the pebble placed in the fifth sector is white, it will be auspi-
cious in the sectors of children and property; but if it is black, the ocean of existence will evaporate, requiring perseverance in the
rites that exorcise misfortunes and promote wealth. If the pebble placed in the sixth sector is white all will be well, but if it is black
the king spirits and attachment spirits will always cause afflictions, requiring the rgyal-po gzhi-mgyogs dkor-mdos thread-cross to be
made. If the pebble placed in the seventh sector is white it will be auspicious, but if it is black the countryside deities hailing from
the maternal uncle's side of the family (zhang-phyogs yul-'dre) will constantly cause harm, and it will help if certain ritual charms (gto)
are made. Lastly, if the pebble placed in the eighth sector is white, it will be auspicious, and if it is black the malign goblins (the'u-brang)



377
The thirty Chinese and Tibetan computational charts
and attachment spirits (bsen-mo) will penetrate the womb, for which reason rites to stabilise the existence of an unborn child and
the rgyal-mdos and the'u-brang skyas-mdos thread-crosses should be made. Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises this chart as follows
(Moonbeams, f. 18a):
In the eleventh [Chinese computational chart named] 'tree and spring',
Which is utilised for the divination concerning the delivery of children, 25
The calculation starts from the earth dog and earth pig years,
[When the subject has the element wood). 26
Plate 14, fig. 18 (Ms I:f. 2): Leafy tree (and spring] (ljon-shing 'dab-rgyas, utilised for divinations concerning childbirth; White Beryl, f. 308a/b)
whether the malign goblins and whether the ocean of existence whether king spirits and attachment
attachment spirits will act will remain intact or not (srid- spirits will perpetually cause harm
against sons and husbands or kyi rgya-mtsho 'khyil ma-'khyil or not (rgyal-bsen rgyun-du gnod
not (the-bsen bu-khyo byed
mi-gnod)
mi-byed)
whether the demons of water
whether the countryside deities
hailing from the maternal uncle's
and fire will cause affliction or
not (me-'dre chu-'dre gnod
mi-gnod)
LEAFY TREE (AND SPRING]
side will cause affliction from the
west or not (nub-nas zhang-'dre
Plate 14, fig. 18
gnod mi-gnod)
whether the malign goblins and
whether the dagger of existence whether the spring of existence
will be dislodged or not (srid will become dry or not (srid-
phur gnam-la yar ma-yar) chu bskams ma-bskams)
attachment spirits will ingress
through the cervix or not (the-bsen
mngal-sgor zhugs ma-zhugs)
19. Snowcock of ill-omen (Ita-bya gong-mo, White Beryl, ff. 3086–309a)
In the nineteenth chart, utilised for divinations concerning pollution of beneficial temples, the following eight calculations are
sequentially made: whether the divine ranks of the male spirits will be broken or not (pho-lha'i lha-gral chag ma-chag); whether the
gods hailing from the maternal uncle's side27 will roam the human world or not (zhang-lha mi-yul 'grim mi-'grim); whether the
hostile gods (dgra-lha) will descend as demons or not (dgra-lha bdud-du babs ma-babs); whether the shoulder-spirits28 will be oppressed
by pollution or not (phrag-lha btsog-gis non ma-non); whether the countryside gods will be oppressed by enemies or not (yul-lha dgra-
yis non ma-non); whether the roof-top spirits will be carried off by disputations or not (rtse-lha gyod-kyis khyer ma-khyer); whether the
male spirits will be widowed or not (pho-lha yugs-kyis phog ma-phog); and whether the spirits of vitality29 and the home-spirits will
ambush the corpse or not (srog-lha-dang nang-lha gnyis ro-la 'jab mi-'jab). Exemplary chart 10.21 has been prepared in respect of a
subject born in the fire dragon year.
10.21 Exemplary chart
wood v. water = 0%
wood v. wood =X
earth v. iron = 0x
earth v. wood =XX
Water mouse
earth v. water =00
Water ox
fire v. water =XX
fire v. water =XX
earth v. fire = 00
Now, if the pebble placed in the first of these sectors is white, it will be auspicious; but if it is black, it portends that the divine ranks of the
male-spirits will be broken, and so appropriate counteracting recitations and rituals should be carried out. If the pebble placed in the sec-
ond sector is white, all will be well; but if it is black, it portends that the spirits hailing from the maternal uncle's side (zhang-lha) will
roam throughout the human world bringing sorrows upon maternal uncles, for which reason the dgu-mdos nag-po mgo-gsum thread-cross
should be made. If the pebble placed in the third sector is white, the hostile gods (dgra-lha) will grant protection, but if it is black they will
descend as demons, so that prayers of supplication to the hostile gods and ritual exorcism of the treacherous hostile spirits (dgra-sri)
should be undertaken. If the pebble placed in the fourth sector is white, all will be well; but if it is black the shoulder-spirits will be pol-
luted, requiring ablutions, supplicatory prayers, incense offerings and so forth to be performed. If the pebble placed in the fifth sector is
white, the countryside gods will offer protection; but if it is black, they will be oppressed by inimical forces, requiring supplicatory
prayers, ritual ransom from death, exorcism of the treacherous hostile spirits (dgra-sri) and incense offerings to be made. If the pebble
placed in the sixth sector is white, all will be well; but if it is black, the spirits of the roof-top prayer-flags will be overwhelmed by disputa-
tions, and it will help if supplicatory prayers and incense offerings are made. If the pebble placed in the seventh sector is white, it will be
auspicious; but if it is black, the male spirits will be widowed, requiring counteracting rituals to be undertaken. Lastly, if the pebble placed
in the eighth sector is white, it will be auspicious, but if it is black the spirits of vitality and the home-spirits will afflict corpses. Therefore,
incense offerings and rituals which attract the lifespan principle (tshe-gugs) should be performed. Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises this
chart as follows (Moonbeams, f. 18b):
In the twelfth [Chinese computational chart named) 'snowcock of ill-omen',
Which is utilised for the divination concerning the pollution of beneficial temples,
The calculation starts from the iron mouse and ox years,
(When the subject has the element wood) 30



378
The White Beryl
Plate 14, fig. 19 (Ms I:f. 2): Snowcock of III-omen (Ita-bya gong-mo, utilised for divinations concerning pollution of beneficial temples; White Beryl, ff. 3086–309a)
whether the shoulder-spirits will whether the countryside gods whether the roof-top spirits will be
be oppressed by pollution or will be oppressed by enemies carried off by disputations or not
not (phrag-lha btsog-gis non or not (yul-Iha dgra-yis non (rtse-lha gyod-kyis khyer ma-khyer
ma-non)
ma-non)
whether the hostile gods will
whether the male-spirits will be
descend as demons or not
SNOWCOCK OF ILL-OMEN
widowed or not (pho-lha yugs-kyis
(dgra-Iha bdud-du babs ma-babs)
whether the maternal uncle
phog ma-phog)
whether the spirits of vitality and the
home spirits will ambush the corpse
Plate 14, fig. 19
whether the divine ranks of the
male-spirits will be broken or
not (pho-Iha'i lha-gral chag
spirits will roam the human
world or not (zhang-lha mi-yul
or not (srog-Iha-dang nang-Iha
gnyis ro-la 'jab mi-'jab)
'grim mi-'grim)
ma-chag)
20. Black kite (dur-bya nag-po, White Beryl, f. 309a/b)
In the twentieth chart, utilised for divinations concerning the harmful influence of malignant demons, the following eight calculations
are sequentially made: whether male malevolent forces will arise as evil spirits or not (pho-bdud 'dre-ru langs ma-langs); whether female
malevolent forces will arise as evil spirits or not (mo-bdud 'dre-ru langs mi-langs); whether living expenses will be stolen or not (bsris-la rku
mi-rku); whether king spirits and bewitchers will ingress within the womb or not (rgyal-'gong mngal-du zhugs ma-zhugs); whether the
ghosts of male murder victims (gre-bo) will assault the vitality or not (gre-bo srog-la rgol mi-rgol); whether king spirits and bewitchers will
steal the life-spirit and lifespan or not (rgyal-'gong ble-tshe rku mi-rku); whether the ghosts of male murder victims (gre-bo) will be exhaust-
ing or not (gre-bo a-thang chad ma-chad); and whether the treacherous oath-breaking spirits (dam-sri) will haunt the castle or not (dam-sri
rgyal-mkhar chags mi-chags). Exemplary chart 10.22 has been prepared in respect of a subject born in the fire dragon year.
10.22 Exemplary chart
wood v. fire = 0x
earth v. water = 00
earth v. fire = 000
wood v. iron = XX
Wood tiger
earth v. earth = 0
Wood hare
fire v. wood = 0
fire v. wood = 00
earth v. wood =XX
Now, if the pebble placed in the first of these sectors is white, it will be auspicious; but if it is black, the male malevolent forces will arise as
evil spirits and it will be inauspicious for males. If the pebble placed in the second sector is white, females will flourish; but if it is black, the
female malevolent forces will arise as evil spirits and it will be inauspicious for females. If the pebble placed in the third sector is white,
food and property will increase; but if it is black, living expenses will be stolen and bewitchers ('gong-po) will arise. If the pebble placed in
the fourth sector is white the family line will flourish, but if it is black the bewitchers will penetrate the womb and the family line will not
prosper. If the pebble placed in the fifth sector is white the vitality will be secure, but if it is black it will be assaulted by the ghosts of male
murder victims (gre-bo) who interrupt the lifespan. If the pebble placed in the sixth sector is white it will be auspicious, but if it is black the
king spirits and bewitchers will steal the life-spirit. If the pebble placed in the seventh sector is white, all will be well for the subject, but if
it is black the subject will be exhausted. Lastly, if the pebble placed in the eighth sector is white it will be auspicious, but if it is black, the
royal castle will be haunted. In all such negative cases, the appropriate counteracting rites are prescribed. Lo-chen Dharmaśrī sum-
marises this chart as follows (Moonbeams, f. 18b):
In the thirteenth [Chinese computational chart named) 'black kite',
Which is utilised for the divination concerning the afflictions of harmful demons,
The calculation starts from the water tiger and water hare years,
[When the subject has the element wood]:31
Plate 14, fig. 20 (Ms I: f. 2): Black kite (dur-bya nag-po, utilised for divinations concerning the harmful influence of malignant demons; White Beryl, f. 309a/b)
whether the ghosts of male
whether king spirits and bewitchers
whether king spirits and
bewitchers will ingress within
the womb or not (rgyal-'gong
mngal-du zhugs ma-zhugs)
murder victims will assault the
vitality or not (gre-bo srog-la
rgol mi-rgoh
will steal the life-spirit and lifespan
or not (rgyal-'gong ble-tshe rku
mi-rku)
whether living expenses will be
whether the ghosts of male murder
stolen or not (bsris-la rku mi-rku)
BLACK KITE
victims will assault the vitality or not
(gre-bo a-thang chad ma-chad)
whether female malevolent
whether male malevolent forces
whether the treacherous oath-
Plate 14, fig. 20
forces will arise as evil spirits or
breaking spirits will haunt the castle
will arise as evil spirits or not
(pho-bdud 'dre-ru langs ma-
not (mo-bdud 'dre-ru langs
or not (dam-sri rgyal-mkhar chags
mi-chags)
mi-langs)
langs)
21. Saiga antelope (sha-ba rgya-bo, White Beryl, ff. 309b-310a)
In the twenty-first chart, utilised for divinations concerning the good luck of the aged, the following eight calculations are sequentially
made: whether the subject will be of the 'white' auspicious corpse type and see his great grandsons or not (bkra-dkar yang-tsha mthong mi-
mthong); whether the subject will be of the variegated' auspicious corpse type and see his grandsons and widows or not (bkra-khras tsha-



379
The thirty Chinese and Tibetan computational charts
yug e-mthong rtsis); whether the subject will be of the 'black' auspicious corpse type and see his great-granddaughters or not (bkra-nag
tsha-mo mthong mi-mthong); whether the black treacherous spirits (sri) afflicting a subject of the auspicious corpse type will be ritually
oppressed or not (bkra-sri nag-po non mi-non); whether the subject will be of the 'kingly' auspicious corpse type and reach the throne or
not (bkra-rgyal rgyal-sar thon ma-thon); whether the subject will be of the auspicious corpse type and dwell in the castle or not (bkra-shis
mkhar-la chags mi-chags); whether the subject will be of the black’auspicious corpse type, interrupting the family line or not (bkra-nag mi-
rabs chad mi-chad); and whether the subject will be of the auspicious corpse type and see his children or not (bkra-shis bu-tsha mthong mi-
mthong). Exemplary chart 10.23 has been prepared in respect of a subject born in the fire dragon year.
10.23 Exemplary chart
wood v. water = 000
wood v. wood = X
earth v. earth = 0
earth v. earth = 0
Fire dragon
earth v. iron = 0X
Fire snake
fire v. fire = X
fire v. fire = X
earth v. water = 00
Now, if the pebble placed in the first of these sectors is white, it will be auspicious; but if it is black, it portends that the subject will not see
his great-grandsons and it will be inauspicious for the family line. If the pebble placed in the second sector is white it will be most auspi-
cious, but if it is black it portends the reverse. If the pebble placed in the third sector is white all will be well, but if it is black the subject
will see granddaughters and it will be inauspicious for the family line. If the pebble placed in the fourth sector is white it will be auspicious
for the family line, but if it is black it will be inauspicious because the auspicious corpse type will be oppressed by the infant corpse type. If
the pebble placed in the fifth sector is white all will be well, but if it is black it will be inauspicious because the throne will not be reached.
If the pebble placed in the sixth sector is white it will be most auspicious, but if it is black the reverse will be the case since the subject will
not dwell in the castle. If the pebble placed in the seventh sector is white, the lineage will not be interrupted, but if it is black, it will be
interrupted. Lastly, if the pebble placed in the eighth sector is white, the subject will have children of good fortune, but if it is black, there
will be no such good fortune. In all these negative cases, the appropriate counteracting rituals are indicated. Lo-chen Dharmaśrī sum-
marises this chart as follows (Moonbeams, f. 18b):
In the fourteenth [Chinese computational chart named) 'saiga antelope',
Which is utilised for the divination concerning the good luck of the aged, 52
The calculation starts from the wood dragon and snake years,
[When the subject has the element wood). 38
Plate 14, fig. 21 (Ms l: f. 2): Saiga antelope (sha-ba rgya-bo; utilised for divinations concerning the good luck of the aged; White Beryl, ff. 3096–310a)
whether the black treacherous
whether the subject will be of
whether the subject will be of the
spirits afflicting a subject of the
auspicious corpse type will be
ritually suppressed or not
the 'kingly' auspicious corpse
type and reach the throne or
not (bkra-rgyal rgyal-sar thon
auspicious corpse type and dwell
in the castle or not (bkra-shis
mkhar-la chags mi-chags)
(bkra-sri nag-po non mi-non
ma-thon)
whether the subject will be of
whether the subject will be of the
the 'black' auspicious corpse
type and see his great-
SAIGA ANTELOPE
'black' auspicious corpse type,
interrupting the family line or not
(bkra-nag mi-rabs chad mi-chad)
Plate 14, fig. 21
granddaughters or not (bkra-nag
tsha-mo mthong mi-mthong)
whether the subject will be of
whether the subject will be of
whether the subject will be of the
the 'variegated' auspicious
the 'white' auspicious corpse
auspicious corpse type and see
corpse type and see grandsons
type and see his great-
his children or not (bkra-shis bu-
and widows or not (bkra-khras
grandsons or not (bkra-dkar
tsha mthong mi-mthong)
tsha-yug e-mthong tsis)
yang-tsha mthong mi-mthong
22. Invalid confined to sickbed (nad-pa yo-nyat, White Beryl, f. 310a)
In the twenty-second chart, utilised for divinations concerning the duration of ill-health, the following eight calculations are sequentially
made: whether the malign goblins (the'u-brang) or the ghosts of female murder victims (gre-mo) which govern diseases will be active or
not (nad-bdag the'u gre-mos byas ma-byas); whether fevers will become extensive in the upper part of the body or not (stod-la tshad-nad rgyas
ma-rgyas); whether cold diseases will descend into the lower part of the body or not (smad-la grang-nad lhungs ma-lhungs); whether mad-
ness and vertigo will be present or not (smyo-nad mgo-'khor yod-dam med); whether suffocation and other such acts of god will occur or not
(lha-nad 'thibs-pa yong mi-yong); whether divine malevolent forces will arise as evil spirits or not (lha-bdud 'dre-ru langs ma-langs); whether
blood diseases will be rife or not (khrag-nad dmar-'byams 'byung mi-'byung); and whether dropsy will beset the lower part of the body or not
(smad-na dmu-chu 'ong mi-'ong). Exemplary chart 10.24 has been prepared in respect of a subject born in the fire dragon year.
10.24 Exemplary chart
wood v. fire = 0X
earth v. wood =XX
earth v. iron = 0X
wood v. iron = XX
Earth horse
earth v. wood =XX
Earth sheep
fire v. earth=0X
fire v. earth = 0x
earth v. iron = 0x



380
The White Beryl
Now, if the pebble placed in the first of these sectors is white, it will be auspicious; but if it is black, the malign goblins (the'u-brang) and
the ghosts of female murder victims (gre-mo) will govern diseases, and there will be pains in the penis, which can be averted by the rites of
the imprecatory goddesses. If the pebble placed in the second sector is white all will be well, but if it is black the subject should beware of
fevers afflicting the upper part of the body. If the pebble placed in the third sector is white, it will be auspicious; but if it is black, cold dis-
eases, such as dropsy and ailments due to serpentine spirits, will descend, requiring specified rites to be undertaken and ritual charms
(gto) to be made. If the pebble placed in the fourth sector is white, the subject and retainers will be well; but if it is black, there will be mad-
ness and vertigo. Therefore, one should persevere in making the rgyal-mdos and khrag-mdos thread-crosses. If the pebble placed in the
fifth sector is white, accidents such as drowning, suffocation, and other acts of god will be avoided; but if it is black, they will take effect,
though they might be averted by supplicatory prayers, smoke offerings and ablutions. If the pebble placed in the sixth sector is white, all
will be well; but if it is black, divine malevolent forces will arise as evil spirits and must be averted by the gtsang-ma lha-mdos thread-cross.
If the pebble placed in the seventh sector is white, all will be well; but if it is black, blood diseases will be rife, requiring thread-crosses
such as the ma-mo khrag-mdos and the dbang-phyug-gi zor-mdos to be made. Lastly, if the pebble placed in the eighth sector is white, it will
be auspicious; but if it is black, there is the risk of tumours and dropsy developing, in which case the subject should persevere with the
various rites pertaining to the nāga spirits. Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises this chart as follows (Moonbeams, f. 18b):
In the fifteenth [Chinese computational chart named) 'invalid confined to sickbed,'
Which is utilised for the divination concerning the duration of ill-health,
The calculation starts from the fire horse and sheep years,
[When the subject has the element wood].94
Plate 14, fig. 22
Plate 14, fig. 22 (Ms I:f. 2): Invalid confined to sickbed (nad-pa yo-nyal, utilised for divinations concerning the duration of ill-health; White Beryl, f. 310a)
whether madness and vertigo
whether suffocation and other
whether divine malevolent forces will
will be present or not (smyo-
nad mgo-'khor yod-dam med)
such acts of god will occur or
not (Iha-nad 'thibs-pa yong
arise as evil spirits or not (Iha-bdud
'dre-ru langs ma-langs)
mi-yong)
whether cold diseases will
whether blood diseases will be rife or
descend into the lower part of
INVALID
not (khrag-nad dmar-'byams
'byung mi-'byung)
the body or not (smad-la grang-
CONFINED TO SICKBED
nad lhungs ma-lhungs)
whether fevers will become
extensive in the upper part of
whether the malign goblins and
the ghosts of female murder
whether dropsy will beset the lower
part of the body or not (smad-na
the body or not (stod-la tshad-
victims which govern diseases
dmu-chuong mi-kong)
nad rgyas ma-rgyas)
will be active or not (nad-bdag
the'u gre-mos byas ma-byas)
23. Red human corpse (mi-ro dmar-po, White Beryl, f. 310a/b)
In the twenty-third chart, utilised for divinations concerning cremation and burial procedures, the following eight calculations are
sequentially made: whether the 'eye of death' will look upon the living or not (shi-mig gson-la blta mi-blta); whether the living and the dead
will be united hand-in-hand or not (gson-gshin lag-pa sbrel ma-sbrel); whether the spirit lords of the soil will descend as demons or not (sa-
bdag bdud-du babs ma-babs); whether the deceased will desire a funeral feast or not (gshin-po ro-zan 'dod mi-'dod); whether the direction in
which the corpse faces will be correct or not (ro kha-bsgyur phyogs log ma-log); whether the deceased will be reborn in an excellent realm or
not (gshin-po gnas-bzang skye mi-skye); whether great irritations will afflict those who are left behind or not ('grams-chen rjes-la 'phog mi-
'phog); and whether irate constellations will beset the country or not (skar-'grams yul-la babs ma-babs). Exemplary chart 10.25 has been
prepared in respect of a subject born in the fire dragon year.
10.25 Exemplary chart
wood v. water = 000
wood v. wood = X
earth v. water =00
earth v. fire = 0 0
Iron monkey
earth v. water = 00
Iron bird
fire v. iron = 00
fire v. iron = 00
earth v. fire
Now, if the pebble placed in the first of these sectors is white, it will be auspicious; but ifit is black, it portends the reverse because the eye of
death will look upon the living. If the pebble placed in the second sector is white, it will be auspicious for those bereaved relatives who are
left behind; but if it is black, one should persevere with the rites which sever the connection of the living with the dead. If the pebble placed



381
The thirty Chinese and Tibetan computational charts
in the third sector is white all will be well, but if it is black the spirit lords of the soil will descend as demons and one should persevere with
the ritual charms which transform the spirit lords of the soil. If the pebble placed in the fourth sector is white it will be auspicious, but if it is
black or variegated it is said that the dead will desire a funeral feast, and so one should rely upon dairy foods for the rituals. If the pebble
placed in the fifth sector is white it will be auspicious, because the corpse will face towards an enemy faction; but if it is black it will face
towards a friendly faction, and specified ritual charms should therefore be made. If the pebble placed in the sixth sector is white, the
deceased will be reborn among the gods (deva) or humans; but if it is black, the deceased will be reborn among the three lower existences,
making it important to engage in virtuous acts. If the pebble placed in the seventh sector is white, all will be well, but if it is black great irri-
tations will afflict the surviving spouse. Lastly, if the pebble placed in the eighth sector is white, it will be auspicious; but if it is black, an
irate constellation will disturb the entire country, and particularly those who make divinations concerning death, and the appropriate rit-
ual means of rectification must therefore be undertaken. Lo-chen Dharmasrī summarises this chart as follows (Moonbeams, f. 19a):
In the eighth [Tibetan computational chart named) 'red human corpse',
Which is utilised for the divination concerning cremation and entombment,
The calculation starts from the earth monkey and earth bird years,
[When the subject has the element wood) 35
Plate 14, fig. 23 (Ms 1: f. 2): Red human corpse (mi-ro dmar-po, utilised for divinations concerning cremation and burial procedures; White Beryl, f. 310a/b)
whether the deceased will
desire a funeral feast or not
(gshin-po ro-zan 'dod
whether the direction in which
the corpse faces will be correct
or not (ro kha-bsgyur phyogs
log ma-log)
whether the deceased will be reborn
in an excellent realm or not (gshin-
p o gnas-bzang skye mi-skye)
mi-'dod)
whether the spirit lords of the
soil will descend as demons or
RED HUMAN CORPSE
whether great irritations will afflict
those who are left behind or not
('grams-chen rjes-la 'phog
mi-'phog)
not (sa-bdag bdud-du babs
ma-babs)
whether the 'eye of death' will
whether irate constellations will beset
Plate 14, fig. 23
whether the living and the dead
will be united hand-in-hand or
not (gson-gshin lag-pa sbrel
the country or not (skar-'grams
look upon the living or not
(shi-mig gson-la blta mi-blta)
yul-la babs ma-babs)
ma-sbre)
24. Pale coffin (shing-sgrom skya-mo, White Beryl, f. 3106–311a)
In the twenty-fourth chart, utilised for divinations concerning cremation, entombment and other modes of corpse disposal, the following
eight calculations are sequentially made: whether the corpse of one with a fire element or a contagious fever-stricken corpse should be cre-
mated or not (dmar-ro 'brum-buli ro me-la bsreg mi-sreg); whether the corpse of one with an earth or water element should be entombed or not
(sa-ro chu-ro-dang sgrom-bur rung mi-rung); whether the direction in which the coffin faces will be correct or not (shing-sgrom kha-yi bsgyur-
phyogs log ma-log); whether the corpse ofone with an adversarial element will be attached to wealth and property or not (gshed-ro phyugs-dang
nor-rdzas chags ma-chags); whether the pathway for disposal of the corpse will coincide with the spirit lord Hal-khyi or not (ro-lam hal-khyi'i
steng song ma-song); whether his peripheral spirit lords will be subdued or not (de'i sa-bdag rnams-ni thul ma-thul); whether the pack animal
carrying the corpse will become hostile or not (ro-khal de-yi gshed-dan byed mi-byed); and whether a family member should be sent to the bur-
ial site or not (rus gcig sa-ru gtong mi-gtong). Exemplary chart 10.26 has been prepared in respect of a subject born in the fire dragon year.
10.26 Exemplary chart
wood v. fire =0x
earth v. earth = 0
earth v. earth = 0
wood v. iron=XX
Water dog
earth v. earth = 0
Water pig
fire v. water =XX.
fire v. water =XX
earth v. wood =XX
Now, if the pebble placed in the first of these sectors is white, cremation is recommended; but if it is black, cremation should not be under-
taken. If the pebble placed in the second sector is white, a deceased person with an earth or water element may be given water burial, but
if it is black that mode of disposal should be avoided. If the pebble placed in the third sector is white, the corpse of one with an iron ele-
ment should be cremated on a rocky mountain, and the head should not face eastwards; but if it is black, it should not be cremated. If the
pebble placed in the fourth sector is white it will be auspicious, but if it is black there will be an adversarial attachment to material things,
coinciding with an irate planet or constellation. If the pebble placed in the fifth sector is white the pathway for corpse disposal will not be
blocked by Hal-khyi, but if it is black the reverse is the case, and appropriate rites should be performed. If the pebble placed in the sixth
sector is white it will be auspicious, but if it is black the spirit lords of the soil will not be subdued. If the pebble placed in the seventh sec-
tor is white, the pack animal carrying the corpse will not become hostile; but if it is black, it will become exhausted. Lastly, if the pebble
placed in the eighth sector is white, a family member may be sent to the burial site; but if it is black no family member should be sent.
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises this chart as follows (Moonbeams, f. 19a):
In the ninth [Tibetan computational chart named) 'pale coffin',
Which is utilised for the correct and incorrect divination procedures for corpses, 36
The calculation starts from the iron dog and iron pig years,
(When the subject has the element wood). 37



382
The White Beryl
Plate 14, fig. 24 (Ms l: f. 2): Pale coffin (shing-sgrom skya-mo, utilised for divinations concerning cremation, entombment and other modes of corpse disposal; White Beryl, f. 3106–311a)
whether the corpse of one with
whether the pathway for
whether the peripheral spirit lords
will be subdued or not (de'i sa-
an adversarial element will be
disposal of the corpse will
ELECT
bdag rnams-ni thul ma-thul
attached to wealth and property
or not (gshed-ro phyugs-dang
nor-rdzas chags ma-chags)
coincide with the spirit lord
Hal-khyi or not (ro-lam hal-
khyi'i steng song ma-song)
whether the direction in which
whether the pack animal carrying
the coffin faces will be correct
PALE COFFIN
the corpse will become hostile or not
or not (shing-sgrom kha-yi
(ro-khal de-yi gshed-dan byed
Plate 14, fig. 24
mi-byed)
bsgyur-phyogs log ma-log)
whether the corpse of one with
whether the corpse of one with
whether a family member should be
an earth or water element
a fire element or a contagious
fever-stricken corpse should be
sent to the burial site or not (rus
gcig sa-ru gtong mi-gtong)
should be entombed or not
(sa-ro chu-ro-dang sgrom-bur
cremated or not (dmar-ro 'brum-
rung mi-rung)
bu'i ro me-la bsreg mi-sreg)
25. Nine-stacked skulls (thod-pa dgu-brtsegs, White Beryl, f. 311a/b)
In the twenty-fifth chart, utilised for divinations concerning good and bad tombs, the following eight calculations are sequentially made:
whether the paternal ancestors will attend the funeral or not (pha-mes dur-du 'gro mi-'gro); whether the living will have good fortune or
not dependent on an auspicious cemetery (dur-sa bzang-pa-la brten-nas gson-po bkra shis mi-shis); whether the sister-in-law will wear an
ornament or not (rnal-ma rgyan-kha-la btags ma-btags); whether spirits of tomb misfortune will win the wager or not (dur-byur rgyan-gyis
rgyal mi-rgyal); whether the life-spirit of a child will be stolen or not (byis-bla rku mi-rku); whether the treacherous spirits of the tombs
(dur-srl) will ingress within the castle or not (dur-sri mkhar-la zhugs ma-zhugs); whether demons and ogres will obfuscate the wager or
not ('dre-srin rgyan-kha sgrib mi-sgrib); and whether the treacherous spirits of affliction ('phung-sri) will open the tomb or not ('phung-sris
dur-kha 'byed mi-'byed). Exemplary chart 10.27 has been prepared in respect of a subject born in the fire dragon year.
10.27 Exemplary chart
wood v. water = 0°C
wood v. wood =X
earth v. iron = 0x
earth v. wood =XX
earth v. fire = 0
Wood mouse
Wood ox
fire v. wood = 0
fire v. wood = 00
earth v. earth = 0
Now, if the pebble placed in the first of these sectors is white, the paternal ancestors will not attend; but if it is black, they will do so and it
will be inauspicious. If the pebble placed in the second sector is white, it will be auspicious for the living, and if it is black, it will be slightly
inauspicious for the living. If the pebble placed in the third sector is white, the sister-in-law will not wear ornaments; but if it is black she
will do so, and it will be inauspicious. If the pebble placed in the fourth sector is white the subject will win the wager, but if it is black the
tomb spirits of misfortune will win. If the pebble placed in the fifth sector is white the life-spirit of the child will not be stolen, but if it is
black it will be inauspicious, and appropriate ritual remedies should be applied. If the pebble placed in the sixth sector is white, all will be
well and the treacherous spirits of the tombs (dur-sri) will not infiltrate the rebirth process; but if it is black they will do so and the tomb
should be protected. If the pebble of the living placed in the seventh sector is white and the pebble of the dead is black, there will be harm,
and appropriate protective rituals should be undertaken. If the pebbles are of different colours, the bdag-'khrugs gto should be made, and if
they are all black various prescribed rites of aversion should be undertaken. Lastly, if the pebble placed in the eighth sector is white, the
tomb will not be opened; but if it is black, the reverse is the case, and suitable protective rites must be carried out. Lo-chen Dharmaśrī
summarises this chart as follows (Moonbeams, f. 19a)
In the tenth [Tibetan computational chart named) 'nine-stacked skulls',
Which is utilised for the divination concerning good and bad tombs,
The calculation starts from the water mouse and water ox years,
[When the subject has the element wood). 38
Plate 14, fig. 25 (Ms I:f.2): Nine-stacked skulls (thod-pa dgu-brtsegs; utilised for divinations concerning good and bad funeral sites; White Beryl, f. 311a/b)
whether spirits of tomb whether the life-spirit of a child whether the treacherous spirits of
misfortune will win the wager will be stolen or not (byis-bla the tombs will ingress within the
or not (dur-byur rgyan-gyis rku mi-rku)
castle or not (dur-sri mkhar-la
rgyal mi-rgya)
zhugs ma-zhugs)
whether the sister-in-law will
whether demons and ogres will
wear an ornament or not (rnal-ma NINE-STACKED SKULLS obfuscate the wager or not ('dre-srin
rgyan-kha-la btags ma-btags)
rgyan-kha sgrib mi-sgrib)
whether the paternal ancestors
whether the treacherous spirits of
whether the living will have
good fortune or not dependent
Plate 14, fig. 25
will attend the funeral or not
affliction will open the tomb or not
on an auspicious cemetery
(pha-mes dur-du 'gro mi-'gro)
('phung-sris dur-kha 'byed mi-'byed)
(dur-sa bzang-pa-la brten-nas
gson-po bkra shis mi-shis)



383
The thirty Chinese and Tibetan computational charts
26. Three-headed spirit lord of the soil (sa-bdag sgo-gsum, White Beryl, f. 311b)
In the twenty-sixth chart, utilised for divinations concerning white, black and variegated ritual charms (gto), the following eight calcula-
tions are sequentially made: whether white ritual charms should be offered to the spirit lords of the soil or not (gto-dkar sa-bdag mchod ma-
mchod); whether the spirit lords of the soil will be agitated by variegated ritual charms or not (khra-bos sa-bdag 'khrugs ma-'khrugs);
whether rudra will be ‘liberated’s9 by black ritual charms or not (nag-pos ru-dra bsgral ma-bsgral); whether enemies will be subdued by the
sound of weapons or not (mtshon-sgras dgra-bo btul ma-btul); whether the bull-headed ritual charm of bad reputation should be cast or not
(mi-kha glang-gto btang ma-btang); whether the cross marked on the death slate of the father's line will be ritually opposed or not (pho-
brgyud khram-bzlog byas ma-byas); whether enchanted objects cast against the mother's line will be repelled or not (ma-brgyud thun-bzlog
byas-ma byas); and whether the pathways of the spirit lords of the soil should be rectified or not (sa-bdag 'gro-lam bcos ma-bcos). Exemplary
chart 10.28 has been prepared in respect of a subject born in the fire dragon year.
10.28 Exemplary chart
wood v. fire = 0x
earth v. water = 00
earth v. fire =00
earth v. wood =XX
wood v. iron =XX
Fire tiger
Fire hare
fire v. fire = X
fire v. fire = X
earth v. iron = 0x
Now, if the pebble placed in the first of these sectors is white, offerings should be made to the spirit lords; but if it is black, one
should beware of making offerings to the king spirits. If the pebble placed in the second sector is white, all will be well, but if it is
black, the spirit lords of the soil will be agitated, for which reason the 'khrugs-gto chen-po should be prepared. If the pebble placed in the
third sector is white, it will be auspicious and rudra will be 'liberated’; but if it is black, rudra will not be liberated’, for which reason the
dgra-zlog dgra-gto nag-po should be made. If the pebble placed in the fourth sector is white it will be auspicious, since enemies will be sub-
dued; but if it is black they will not be subdued; and the hostile treacherous spirits (dgra-srı) must be oppressed. If the pebble placed in the
fifth sector is white there will be no harm if the bull-headed charm of bad reputation is cast, since no deity is encountered; but if it is black
it should not be cast, and instead other prescribed ritual charms should be employed. If the pebble placed in the sixth sector is white it will
be auspicious to oppose ritually the cross marked on the death slate (khram) of the father's line, but if it is black one should persevere in
ritual means of directly averting obstacles to the father's line. If the pebble placed in the seventh sector is white it will be auspicious,
because the enchanted objects directed against the mother's line will be repelled. If it is black, however, one should try to apply the ritual
means of counteracting the rites which direct enchanted objects against the mother's line. Lastly, if the pebble placed in the eighth sector
is white the pathways of the spirit lords of the soil should be rectified, whereas if it is black they should not, and instead a series of
ritual charms should be employed. Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises this chart as follows (Moonbeams, f. 19a):
In the eleventh [Tibetan computational chart named) 'three-headed spirit lord of the soil',
Which is utilised for divinations concerning white, black and variegated good-luck charms,
The calculation starts from the wood tiger and wood hare years,
[When the subject has the element wood].40
Plate 14, fig. 26
Plate 14, fig. 26 (Ms l: f. 2): Three-headed spirit lord of the soil (sa-bdag sgo-gsum, utilised for divinations concerning white, black and variegated good luck charms; White Beryl, f. 311b)
whether enemies will be whether the bull-headed ritual whether the cross marked on the
subdued by the sound of charm of bad reputation should death slate of the father's line should
weapons or not (mtshon-sgras be cast or not (mi-kha glang be ritually averted or not (pho-
dgra-bo btul ma-btu)
gto btang ma-btang)
brgyud khram-bzlog byas ma-byas)
whether rudra will be 'liberated'
whether the enchanted objects
by black ritual charms or not THREE-HEADED SPIRIT LORD directed against the mother's line
(nag-pos ru-dra bsgral
OF THE SOIL
should be ritually averted or not
ma-bsgrah
(ma-brgyud thun-bzlog byas-
ma byas)
whether the spirit lords of the
whether white ritual charms
whether the pathways of the spirit
soil will be agitated by
should be offered to the spirit
lords of the soil should be rectified
variegated ritual charms or not
lords of the soil or not (gto-
or not (sa-bdag 'gro-lam bcos
(khra-bos sa-bdag 'khrugs ma-
dkar sa-bdag mchod
ma-bcos)
'khrugs)
ma-mchod)



384
The White Beryl
27. Golden crossed-vajra (gser-gyi rdo-rje, White Beryl, ff. 3116–312a)
In the twenty-seventh chart, utilised for divinations concerning the vitality of males, the following eight calculations are sequen-
tially made: whether the tree of vitality will be broken or not (srog-gi ljon-shing chag ma-chag); whether the lifespan and vitality will
be deceived by malevolent forces or not (tshe-srog bdud-kyis bslus ma-bslus); whether the life-spirit and lifespan will be carried off by
evil spirits or not (bla-tshe 'dre-yis khyer ma-khyer); whether the paternal ancestors will be ambushed by ghosts or not (pha-mes shi-'dres
'jab mi-'jab); whether the mother's luck element will penetrate the demon's mouth or not (ma-klungs 'dre-yi khar chud ma-chud);
whether the seal of the trigrams will be damaged or not (spar-kha'i phyag-rgya ral ma-ral); whether the tomb-sign will be present or not
in a year corresponding to the subject's vitality element (nang-srog lo dur-du tshud ma-tshud); and whether the secret multiple of nine
will coincide or not (gsang-ba dgu-mig babs ma-babs). Exemplary chart 10.29 has been prepared in respect of a subject born in the
fire dragon year.
10.29 Exemplary chart
wood v. fire = 0x
earth v. earth = 0
earth v. earth = 0
wood v. wood = X
Earth dragon
earth v. water = 00
Earth snake
fire v. earth = 0x
fire v. earth = 0x
earth v. fire = 0%
Now, if the pebble placed in the first of these sectors is white, the tree of vitality will flourish; but if it is black, it will be broken – it will
help if a ritual dagger is fixed in order to secure human property and the lifespan. If the pebble placed in the second sector is white there
will be no deception, but if it is black supplicatory prayers should be undertaken. If the pebble placed in the third sector is white, the life-
spirit will not be carried off by demons; but if it is black, appropriate recitations and rituals should be undertaken since it will be carried
off. If the pebble placed in the fourth sector is white the paternal ancestors will not be harmed by the demons, but if it is black they will,
and the demons must be supplicated. If the pebble placed in the fifth sector is white the mother's luck element will not be harmed by
demons, but if it is black it will, and ritual daggers should be employed to secure the lifespan and vitality. If the pebble placed in the sixth
sector is white, the seal of the trigrams will not be damaged, but if it is black the reverse will be the case and the ritual charms pertaining
to the trigrams should be undertaken. If the pebble placed in the seventh sector is white, the tomb-sign will not be present, but if it is
black it will be and the recitations which counteract the tomb-sign (dur-mig) should be undertaken. Lastly, if the pebble placed in the
eighth sector is white it will be auspicious because there will be no ill-health; but if it is black the multiples of nine will have an impact, and
the appropriate rituals should be undertaken, corresponding to the year. Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises this chart as follows
(Moonbeams, f. 19a/b):
In the twelfth [Tibetan computational chart named) 'crossed vajra',
Which is utilised for the divination concerning good fortune
Associated with the vitality element of males,
The calculation starts from the fire dragon and fire snake years,
[When the subject has the element wood). 41
Plate 14, fig. 27
SIUNE
Plate 14, fig. 27 (Ms I:f. 2): Golden crossed-vajra (gser-gyi rdo-rje; utilised for divinations concerning the vitality element of males; White Beryl, ff. 3116–312a)
whether the paternal ancestors whether the mother's luck whether the seal of the trigrams will
will be ambushed by ghosts or element will penetrate the be damaged or not (spar-kha'i
not (pha-mes shi-'dres 'jab demon's mouth or not (ma phyag-rgya ral ma-ra)
mi-'jab)
klungs 'dre-yi khar chud
ma-chud)
whether a tomb-sign will be present
whether the life-spirit and
lifespan will be carried off by
GOLDEN CROSSED-VAJRA
or not in the year of the subject's
evil spirits or not (bla-tshe
vitality element (nang-srog lo dur-
'dre-yis khyer ma-khyer)
du tshud ma-tshud
whether the tree of vitality will
whether the secret multiple of nine
whether the lifespan and
vitality will be deceived
by malevolent forces or
be broken or not (Srog-gi ljon-
shing chag ma-chag
will coincide or not (gsang-ba dgu-
mig babs ma-babs)
not (tshe-srog bdud-
kyis bslus ma-bslus)



385
The thirty Chinese and Tibetan computational charts
28. Eight-spoked wheel ('khor-lo rtsibs-brgyad, White Beryl, f. 312a/b)
In the twenty-eighth chart, utilised for divinations concerning the body element of young children, the following eight calculations are
sequentially made: whether the body of a young child will rest within a tomb or not (lus-de dur-du zhugs ma-zhugs); whether the mountain
of the body will crumble or not (lus-kyi ri-bo nyil ma-nyil); whether the body will be isolated from the gods or not (lus-rten lha-dang bral ma-
bral); whether the body of a young child will be enticed within the net of malevolent forces or not (lus-ni bdud-rgyar tshud ma-tshud);
whether the hat of the malevolent forces will fall upon the young child's head or not (mgo-la bdud-zhu babs ma-babs); whether evil spirits
will rise up against the body or not (lus-la 'dre-ngan langs ma-langs); whether a young child will be oppressed by misfortunes and disputa-
tions (byur-dang gyod-kyis mnon ma-mnon); and whether a young child will be caught by the noose of the malevolent forces or not (bdud-kyi
zhags-pas thebs ma-thebs). Exemplary chart 10.30 has been prepared in respect of a subject born in the fire dragon year.
10.30 Exemplary chart
wood v. water = 0 0
earth v. fire = 000
Water monkey
earth v. water = 00
earth v. fire = 000
wood v. wood = X
Water bird
fire v. water = XX
fire v. water =XX
earth v. earth = 0
Now, if the pebble placed in the first of these sectors is white, the child's body will be healthy and free from disease; but if it is black, the
body will come to rest within a tomb and it will be inauspicious. If the pebble placed in the second sector is white it will be auspicious and
the child's body will be free from diseases, but if it is black the body will succumb to diseases. If the pebble placed in the third sector is
white the mountain of the body will flourish, but if it is black it will be inauspicious. If the pebble placed in the fourth sector is white all
will be well, but ifit is black the body will be enticed within the net of the malevolent forces and it will be inauspicious. If the pebble placed
in the fifth sector is white it will be auspicious because the parents will see their children grow up, but if it is black, the demonic hat will
descend upon the child's head and it will be inauspicious. If the pebble placed in the sixth sector is white the child will be of good health
and not isolated from the gods, but if it is black recitations of the Dhārarṇī of Amitāyus (tshe-gzungs) must be made. If the pebble placed in
the seventh sector is white all will be well, but if it is black a child will survive if a girl dies first, otherwise it will only be partially raised.
Lastly, if the pebble placed in the eighth sector is white, children and wealth will increase, but if it is black it will be inauspicious. In all
such negative cases, the appropriate counteracting rites and recitations are specified. Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises this chart as fol-
lows (Moonbeams, f. 19b):
In the thirteenth [Tibetan computational chart named] 'eight-spoked wheel',
Which is utilised for divinations concerning the body element of young children,
The calculation starts from the iron bird and monkey years,
[When the subject has the element wood). 42
Plate 14, fig. 28
Plate 14, fig. 28 (Ms I:f. 2): Eight-spoked wheel ('khor-lo rtsibs-brgyad, utilised for divinations concerning the body element of young children; White Beryl, f. 312a/b)
whether the body of a young
whether the hat of the
whether evil spirits will rise up
child will be enticed within the
malevolent forces will fall upon
against the body or not (lus-la
'dre-ngan langs ma-langs)
net of malevolent forces or not
(lus-ni bdud-rgyar tshud
the young child's head or not
(mgo-la bdud-zhu babs
ma-tshud
ma-babs)
whether the body will be
whether a young child will be
EIGHT-SPOKED WHEEL
oppressed by misfortunes and
isolated from the gods or not
(lus-rten Iha-dang bral ma-bra)
disputations (byur-dang gyod-kyis
mnon ma-mnon)
whether the mountain of the
body will crumble or not (lus-
kyi ri-bo nyil ma-nyil
whether the body of a young
child will rest within a tomb or
not (lus-de dur-du zhugs
whether a young child will be caught
by the noose of the malevolent
forces or not (bdud-kyi zhags-pas
ma-zhugs)
thebs ma-thebs)
29. Spiralling svāstika (gYung-drung 'khyil-ba, White Beryl, f. 312b)
In the twenty-ninth chart, utilised for divinations concerning the destiny element of women, the following eight calculations are sequen-
tially made: whether the sea of destiny will evaporate or not (dbang-thang mtsho-mo bskams ma-bskams); whether the mountain of destiny
will be incinerated or not (dbang-ri me-la shor ma-shor); whether children will fall from their mother's lap or not (ma pang-bu-ni shor ma-
shor); whether women will be enticed within the net of malevolent forces or not (dbang-thang bdud-rgyar tshud ma-tshud); whether the



386
The White Beryl
treasury of destiny will be emptied or not (dbang-thang bang-mdzod stongs ma-stongs); whether the woman's destiny will enter upon the
pathway of demons or not (dbang-thang 'dre-lam tshud ma-tshud); whether the castle of destiny will be destroyed or not (dbang-thang
mkhar-po zhig ma-zhig); and whether destiny will be auspicious in the household sector or not (dbang-thang khyim-du bzang mi-bzang).
Exemplary chart 10.31 has been prepared in respect of a subject born in the fire dragon year.
10.31 Exemplary chart
wood v. fire = 0X
earth v. wood = XX
earth v. iron = 0x
wood v. iron =XX
Iron horse
earth v. iron = 0x
Iron sheep
fire v. iron = 00
fire v. iron = 00
earth v. water = 00
Now, if the pebble placed in the first of these sectors is white, it indicates that food, property and resources will be amassed; but if it is
black, the sea of destiny will evaporate and rites must be performed to promote the destiny element. If the pebble placed in the second sec-
tor is white all will be well, but if it is black the mountain of destiny will be incinerated and fire or water elements will afflict the mother's
luck aspect, for which reason certain ritual charms should be made to promote the destiny element. If the pebble placed in the third sector
is white children will thrive on their mother's lap, and there will be six siblings; but if it is black it will be inauspicious for the woman, the
child and wealth. This may be remedied if thread-crosses are made to promote good auspices and prosperity. If the pebble placed in the
fourth sector is white all will be well, but if it is black the fields will have no crops, there will be no curd, the household members will be
few, and so forth. If the pebble placed in the fifth sector is white it will be auspicious, but if it is black the treasury of destiny will be empty
and it will be inauspicious for the father's brother. If the pebble placed in the sixth sector is white it will be auspicious, but if it is black the
reverse will be the case. If the pebble placed in the seventh sector is white there will be an abundance of food and resources, but if it is
black it will be inauspicious for resources. Lastly, if the pebble placed in the eighth sector is white, grains, wealth and resources will
increase, and it is said that ‘one father may have a hundred children’; but if it is black the woman will be caught in the noose of the demons
and there will be long-term ill omens, even if the current situation is positive. In all such negative cases, the appropriate counteracting
rites and recitations are mentioned. Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises this chart as follows (Moonbeams, f. 19b):
In the fourteenth [Tibetan computational chart named) 'spiralling svāstika',
Which is utilised for the divination concerning the destiny element of women,
The calculation starts from the earth horse and sheep years,
[When the subject has the element wood).48
Plate 14, fig. 29
Plate 14, fig. 29 (Ms I: f. 2): Spiralling svāstika (gYung-drung 'khyil-ba; utilised for divinations concerning the destiny element of women; White Beryl, f. 312b)
whether women will be enticed
whether the treasury of destiny
whether the women's destiny will
within the net of malevolent
enter upon the pathway of demons
will be emptied or not (dbang-
thang bang-mdzod stongs
ma-stongs)
or not (dbang-thang 'dre-lam
tshud ma-tshud)
forces or not (dbang-thang
bdud-rgyar tshud ma-tshud
whether children will fall from
their mother's lap or not (ma
SPIRALLING SVĀSTIKA
whether the castle of destiny will be
destroyed or not (dbang-thang mkhar
-po zhig ma-zhig)
pang-bu-ni shor ma-shor)
whether the mountain of
whether the sea of destiny will
whether destiny will be auspicious
destiny will be incinerated or
not (dbang-ri me-la shor
evaporate or not (dbang-thang in the household sector or not
mtsho-mo bskams ma-bskams) (dbang-thang khyim-du bzang
mi-bzang)
ma-shor)
30. Eight-petalled lotus (padma 'dab-brgyad, White Beryl, ff. 312b-313a)
In the thirtieth chart, utilised for divinations concerning the luck element of important or educated persons and artisans, the following
eight calculations are sequentially made: whether the flagpoles of luck will break or not (lung-rta'i dar-shing chag ma-chag); whether the
defamation of one's fellow countrymen will be rife or not (yul-mi'i mi-kha phog ma-phog); whether one's pleasant reputation will fade or
not (snyan-pa'i gtam-snyan yal ma-yal); whether one's luck will be enticed within the net of malevolent forces or not (klung-rta bdud-rgyar
tshud ma-tshud); whether the prosperous motion of the wind-horse of luck will abate or not (klung-rta'i dmu-yab bskams ma-bskams);
whether the food of luck will be carried off by demons or not (klung-zas 'dre-yis khyer mi-khyer); whether the line of communication
between gods and mankind will be severed or not (lha-mi'i bar-thag chad mi-chad); and whether one will be loved by the high and despised
by the lowly or not (mtho-byams dma'-sdang 'ong mi-'ong). Exemplary chart 10.32 has been prepared in respect of a subject born in the fire
dragon year.



387
The thirty Chinese and Tibetan computational charts
10.32 Exemplary chart
wood v. fire = 0x
wood v. iron = XX
earth v. earth = 0
earth v. earth = 0
earth v. wood =XX
Wood dog
Wood pig
fire v. wood = 0
fire v. wood = 0
earth v. iron = 0x
Now, if the pebble placed in the first of these sectors is white, the father will be like a king and the children like ministers; but if it is black,
the flagpoles of luck will break, while enemies and thieves cause affliction and the paternal ancestors will emigrate, for which reasons
rites promoting luck should be undertaken. If the pebble placed in the second sector is white all will be well, but if it is black there will be
unwarranted bad reputation and no one will show respect. If the pebble placed in the third sector is white the banners of luck will be
secure, and there will be good auspices in the long term even if one is presently in a state of decline; but ifit is black the banner of luck will
fade, one will be ridiculed by one's countrymen, and there will be obstacles to vitality. If the pebble placed in the fourth sector is white one
will be able to accomplish all that one wishes, but if it is black, the luck aspect will be ensnared in the net of malevolent forces and there
will be accusations. If the pebble placed in the fifth sector is white, the prosperous motion of the wind-horse of luck will not abate and it
will be auspicious; but if it is black, the reverse will be the case, there will be no prosperity and food will be squandered. If the pebble
placed in the sixth sector is white all will be well, but if it is black, food and property will be carried off by demons. If the pebble placed in
the seventh sector is white it will be auspicious, but if it is black, the line of communication between gods and mankind will be severed, the
protectors will descend as demons and it will be inauspicious for the paternal ancestors. Lastly, if the pebble placed in the eighth sector is
white, the banner of good repute will be hoisted, men and women will be happy in old age, and the aged will warm themselves in the sun.
If it is black, however, there will be ups and downs in the first part of one's life, and these may recur in later life. In most negative cases,
the suitable counteracting rites are specified. Lo-chen Dharmaśrī summarises this chart as follows (Moonbeams, f. 19b):
In the fifteenth [Tibetan computational chart named) 'eight-petalled lotus',
Which is utilised for divinations concerning the luck element
Of important or educated persons,
The calculation starts from the water mouse and pig years,
When the subject has the element wood). 44
Plate 14, fig. 30
Plate 14, fig. 30 (Ms I: f. 2): Eight-petalled lotus (padma 'dab-brgyad, utilised for divinations concerning the luck element of important and educated persons, and artisans; White Beryl, ff. 3126–313a)
whether one's luck will be
whether the food of luck will be
enticed within the net of
carried off by demons or not (klung-
whether the prosperous motion
of the wind-horse of luck will
abate or not (klung-rta'i dmu-
yab bskams ma-bskams)
malevolent forces or not
zas 'dre-yis khyer mi-khyer)
(klung-rta bdud-rgyar tshud
ma-tshud
whether one's pleasant
whether the line of communication
reputation will fade or not
EIGHT-PETALLED LOTUS
between gods and mankind will be
(snyan-pa'i gtam-snyan yal
severed or not (Iha-mi'i bar-thag
ma-ya)
chad mi-chad
whether the defamation of
whether the flagpoles of luck
whether one will be loved by the
one's fellow countrymen will
high and despised by the lowly or
will break or not (lung-rta'i
dar-shing chag ma-chag)
be rife or not (yul-mi'i mi-kha
not (mtho-byams dma'-sdang
phog ma-phog)
'ong mi-'ong
General observations (White Beryl, f. 313b)
If all the three pebbles placed in the bottom row of a given chart are white, there will be good auspices in the latter part of the subject's
life: but if they are black, it will be inauspicious. If the two pebbles of the middle row are white, demons will not cause affliction, while food
and property will be abundant; but if they are black, the reverse will be the case. If the pebbles of the top row are white and those of the
bottom row black, the paternal ancestors will flourish but the subject will decline, and there will be bad auspices in the latter part of the
subject's life. Conversely, if the pebbles of the top row are black and those of the bottom row are white, the subject will flourish and the
paternal ancestors will decline. Furthermore, if the pebbles of the top and bottom rows are black and those of the middle row white there
will be no demons present, while food and property will be abundant, and all wishes accomplished. However, if the pebbles of the top and
bottom rows are white and those of the middle row black, the reverse will be the case. If all the pebbles are white there are various ill
omens, and if they are all black, the predictions are far worse! In such cases there are suitable counteracting rites which must be under-
taken. The outcome is most auspicious when all the pebbles are a mixture of black and white.



XI
The thirteen charts of Bal-mo lding-skor



390
The White Beryl
The simplified thirteen charts of Bal-mo lding-skor' are derived from a very elaborate divination system, which originally is said to have
employed 2,920 pebbles, and a more abridged system utilising 872 pebbles (371 basic pebbles and 501 symbolic pebbles).
In each of the thirteen charts of Bal-mo lding-skor, five pebbles are employed to represent respectively the
various contrasts between five designated aspects and the subject's vitality element, body element, destiny element, luck element and
numeric square. White pebbles are placed to represent mother- or friend-relationships, or identity-relationships of earth and water; and
black ones to represent son- and enemy-relationships, as well as identity-relationships of wood, iron and fire. Among them, enemy-
relationships are considered to be the most dangerous.
The thirteen charts (White Beryl, ff. 3146–322a)
1. White garuda (bya-khyung dkar-po, White Beryl, ff. 3146–315a)
In the first chart, utilised for divinations concerning kings, the following five calculations are sequentially made, counting backwards
from the bird year in an enemy-relationship with the subject's constitutional type: whether the royal residence will be deserted or not
(rgyal-rabs gdan-sa stongs ma-stongs); whether the pile of royal tiger- and leopard-skin rugs will be worn down or not (stag-gzig gra-'dzum
yal ma-yal); whether the silken knot of government will be undone or not (chab-srid dar-mdud grol ma-grol); whether the palace will fall
into the hands of another or not (pho-brang mi-la shor ma-shor); and whether the royal felt hat will fall down into the dust or not (zhva-phy-
ing rdul-'og song ma-song).
Now, if the pebble indicative of the vitality element, which is placed in the first of these sectors, is white, it will
be most auspicious for the royal dynasty, suggesting an uninterrupted reign and long life; but if it is black, there is a danger that the
royal line will be interrupted, that there will be conflagrations, and that the ancestral treacherous spirits of the tombs (dur-sri) will
be aggravated, for which reasons various prescribed rites must be undertaken. If the pebble indicative of the body element, placed in
the second sector, is white, the pile of the royal tiger- and leopard-skin rugs will be thick, and the queen will give birth to a charis-
matic prince, while the entire kingdom will be established in peace, and the king's body will enjoy good health; but if it is black, the
pile will be worn down, there will be disharmony between the king and his queens, and quarrels between the king and his sons. The
kingdom will disintegrate and there will be mutually harmful recriminations and ill-health. Therefore, unbounded acts of generosity
and other ritual means of protecting the body should be undertaken. If the pebble indicative of the destiny element, which is placed in
the third sector, is white, the knot of firm government will not be released, resources will be extensive, and royal fortune will be wide-
ranging; but if it is black, the palace will become dilapidated, there will be loss of cattle, the knot of firm government will be released, and
resources will be scant, for which reasons rites should be undertaken to attract prosperity, and the bKa'-'dus should be recited. If the peb-
ble indicative of the luck element, which is placed in the fourth sector, is white, there will be good reputation, but if it is black the govern-
ment will become unstable, and there will be disputations, which may be resolved by performing rites which restore luck and oppose hos-
tile forces. If the pebble indicative of the numeric square, which is placed in the fifth sector, is white, the king's lineage will flourish, but if
it is black the royal hat will be tainted with dust, the government will be brought down by wars, and there will be bad times, ill-health and
famine, for which reasons wrathful mantras and rites of aversion should be undertaken, along with the ma-mo'i spyi-mdos thread-cross.
Plate 15, fig. 1
Plate 15, fig. 1 (Ms I:f. 59): White garuda (bya-khyung dkar-po, utilised for divinations concerning kings; White Beryl, ff. 314b-315a)
whether the royal residence will be deserted or not (rgyal-rabs gdan-sa stongs ma-stongs)
whether the pile of royal tiger-
whether the royal felt hat will fall
and leopard-skin rugs will be
WHITE GARUDA
down into the dust or not (zhva-
worn down or not (stag-gzig
phying rdul-'og song ma-song)
gra-'dzum yal ma-ya)
whether the silken knot of government will be whether the palace will fall into the hands of
undone or not (chab-srid dar-mdud grol ma-gro) another or not (pho-brang mi-la shor ma-shor)
2. White snowlion (gangs-seng dkar-mo; White Beryl, f. 315a/b)
In the second chart, utilised for divinations concerning spiritual friends, the following five calculations are sequentially made, counting
backwards from the hare year in an enemy-relationship with the subject's constitutional type: whether the golden vajra will vanish into
space or not (gser-rdor gnam-du yar ma-yar); whether the variegated vase will slip from the hand or not (phra-men bum-pa phyag-nas shor-
ram ma-shor); whether the crystal rosary will fall into an ash-pit or not (shel-dkar-gyi 'phreng-ba thal-khung lhungs ma-lhungs); whether the
turquoise mandala of offerings will be chipped or not (gYu-yi mandal dkyil grums-sam ma-grums); and whether the lion-throne will col-
lapse from its foundation or not (seng-gdan khri rmang-nas 'gyel-lam ma-'gyel).
Now, if the pebble indicative of the vitality element, which is placed in the first of these sectors, is white, there will
be an uninterrupted lifespan and the body of deathless indestructible reality will be attained, so that all phenomenal appearances will be
controlled and the blessings of the spiritual teachers will be present; but if it is black, the golden vajra will fade into space, the lifespan will
be cut short, and potency will decline, for which reasons the subject should persevere with ritual service and means for attainment, great
acts of renunciation, the recitation of the Prajñāpāramitā, and so forth. If the pebble indicative of the body element, which is placed in the
second sector, is white, the victory banner of the saffron robe will stand erect and there will be extensive blessings and long life; but ifit is
black, the variegated vase will slip from the hands, the course of life will be short, the body will succumb to ill-health and there will be no
worthy disciples, for which reasons mantras of retention should be recited, demons opposed, and so forth. If the pebble indicative of the
destiny element, which is placed in the third sector, is white, the profound truth will be manifested through the dance of magical illusion,
disciples will flourish and there will be extensive resources; but if it is black, the crystal rosary will break, there will be no increase in
enlightened activity or resources, altruistic efforts will be thwarted, and one will live from hand to mouth, for which reasons various pre-
scribed rites, offerings and empowerments should be undertaken, along with triple acts of renunciation. If the pebble indicative of the



391
The thirteen charts of Bal-mo lding-skor
luck element, which is placed in the fourth sector, is white, the flowers of good reputation and attributes will bloom, and the disciples will
prosper, but ifit is black the turquoise mandala of offerings will be chipped, and there will be fear of malign gossip and ill repute, for which
reasons offerings should be made to images, scriptures and stūpas, which are respectively the receptacles of buddha-body, speech and
mind, along with donations of robes, supplicatory prayers, and the undertaking of virtuous acts. If the pebble indicative of the numeric
square, which is placed in the fifth sector, is white, there will be long life, the blessings will flow as a stream of nectar, and enlightened
activities will flourish throughout the ten directions; but if it is black, the throne will collapse, the lifespan will be interrupted, and there
will be the risk of emigration, for which reasons prayers to secure long life should be undertaken, along with the thread-crosses pertain-
ing to the sGrub-chen bka'-brgyad.
Plate 15, fig. 2 (Ms I:f. 59): White snowlion (gangs-seng dkar-mo); utilised for divinations concerning spiritual friends; White Beryl, f. 315a/b)
Plate 15, fig. 2.
whether the crystal rosary will fall into an ash-pit or not
(shel-dkar-gyi 'phreng-ba thal-khung Ihungs ma-lhungs)
whether the variegated vase will
whether the turquoise mandala
slip from the hand or not (phra-
WHITE SNOWLION of offerings will be chipped or not
men bum-pa phyag-nas shor-
(gYu-yi mandal dkyil grums
ram ma-shor)
sam ma-grums)
whether the golden vajra will vanish into space
whether the lion-throne will collapse from its
foundation or not (seng-gdan khri rmang-nas
or not (gser-rdor gnam-du yar ma-yar)
'gyel-lam ma-'gye)
3. Gold snake of existence (srid-pa'i sbrul-gser, White Beryl, ff. 315b-316b)
In the third chart, utilised for divinations concerning mantrins, the following five calculations are sequentially made, counting back-
wards from the snake year in a friend-relationship with the subject's constitutional type: whether the golden vajra will fade into space or
not (gser-rdor nam-mkhar yar-ram ma-yar); whether the bell of pleasant sound will slip from the hand or not (gsung-snyan dril-bu shor ma-
shor); whether the radiance of the mandala will vanish or not (dkyil-'khor bkrag-mdangs yal ma-yal); whether the splendid point of the ritual
dagger will be shattered or not (phur-pa'i dpal-rtse brdugs ma-brdugs), and whether the injunctions of the dākinīs will be infringed or not
(mkha'-'gro'i bka'-chad yong mi-yong).
Now, if the pebble indicative of the vitality element, which is placed in the first of these sectors, is white, the lifes-
pan will be secure, it will be auspicious for lineage-holders, and blessings will accrue even though one has made no efforts in ritual service
(sevā) and means of attainment (sādhana);? but if it is black, the golden vajra will fade, and even if the lineage of a mantrin is fine at the out-
set, later there is the risk that it will be broken, commitments will degenerate, and there will be life-threatening obstacles. For these rea-
sons the mantrin should perform ablutions and specific rites, including the means for attainment of Vajrakīla, the rites of reparation and
confession pertaining to the protectors of the Buddhist doctrine, and the elimination of transgressions of the commitments (samaya).” If
the pebble indicative of the body element, which is placed in the second sector, is white, there will be no ill-health, it will be auspicious for
lineage-holders, and phenomenal appearances will be controlled; but if it is black the sound of the bell will be damaged, so that ill-health
will ensue, the lineage of mantrins will be confused and all one's present efforts in respect of ritual service and rites of attainment will be
ineffectual, for which reasons images of meditational deities should be drawn, feast-offerings (tshogs) and gtor-ma offerings should be
made, while degeneration of the commitments should be rectified. If the pebble indicative of the destiny element, which is placed in the
third sector, is white, the father will be able to summon the gods and demons of the eight classes by the power of mantra to serve his son,
and all obstacles will be liberated within the expanse of actual reality (dharmadhātu); but if it is black, the radiance of the mandala will
fade, there will be grave obstacles for the son even if a ritual dagger (kīla) can be driven into solid rock, while food and wealth will be
depleted, and the hermitage may be deserted, for which reasons one should move to another retreat centre, and engage in meditation,
persevering in the recitation of wrathful mantras, as well as offering the ritual charms (gto) which restore fortune. If the pebble indicative
of the luck element, which is placed in the fourth sector, is white, all obstacles will be swiftly liberated by the power of wrathful sorcery
(abhicāra) and the mantrin's reputation will be unscathed; but if it is black, the tip of the ritual dagger will be cracked, and one will acquire
a bad reputation even if one's lineage was formerly auspicious, and one will be the object of others' imprecations, for which reasons one
should perform the requisite rites and ablutions, offer hundreds or thousands of butter lamps, and so forth. If the pebble indicative of the
numeric square, which is placed in the fifth sector, is white, the lineage will prosper like the sun rising in an unclouded sky and all impre-
cations can be reversed, but if it is black the injunctions of the dākinīs will be infringed, lineage-holders will be cursed, and the sound of
mantra will be obscured, for which reasons timely offerings should be made to the Three Precious Jewels (triratna), the meditational
deities and protectors of the Buddhist doctrine, while one should persevere in the practice of the most profound esoteric instructions, and
earnestly perform rites of reparation and confession.
Plate 15, fig. 3 (Ms 1: f.59): Gold snake of existence (srid-pa'i sbrul-gser, utilised for divinations concerning mantrins; White Beryl, ff. 315b-316b)
whether the radiance of the mandala will vanish or not (dkyil-'khor bkrag-mdangs yal ma-ya)*
whether the splendid point of the
Plate 15, fig. 3
whether the bell of pleasant
sound will slip from the hand or
GOLD SNAKE OF EXISTENCE
kila will be shattered or not (phur-
not (gsung-snyan dril-bu shor
pa'i dpal-rtse brdugs ma-brdugs)”
ma-shor)
whether the golden vajra will fade into space or
not (gser-rdor nam-mkhar yar-ram ma-yar)
whether the injunctions of the ļākinīs will be
infringed or not (mkha'-'gro'i bka'-chad yong
mi-yong



392
The White Beryl
4. Turquoise dragon (gYu-'brug, White Beryl, ff. 3166-317a)
In the fourth chart, utilised for divinations concerning Bon priests, the following five calculations are sequentially made, counting back-
wards from the dragon year in a mother-relationship with the subject's constitutional type: whether the helmet horns of meteorite will
have rusted or not (gnam-lcags-kyi bya-ru btsa'-yis khyer ma-khyer); whether the shaft of the divine arrow will be broken or not (lha-mda'
rked-nas chag ma-chag); whether the drum and cloche will slip from the hand or not (rnga-gshang lag-nas shor ma-shor); whether the Phyva-
bon priest will slip from his seat or not (phyva-bon gdan-las 'dred ma-'dred); and whether the ties of the coloured threads utilised alongside
the thread-cross will break or not (rgyang-bu'i 'brel-thag chad ma-chad).
Now, if the pebble indicative of the vitality element, which is placed in the first of these sectors, is white, it will be
auspicious for the Bon lineage; but if it is black, the helmet horns of meteorite will rust, the lineage will decline even if currently
flourishing, and there is the risk of a young child dying and of the lineage being interrupted, for which reasons rites to restore prosperity
and rites of reparation and confession should be undertaken, along with offerings to the protectors. If the pebble indicative of the body
element, which is placed in the second sector, is white, life and lineage will prosper without interruptions; but if it is black, the shaft or
quill of the arrow will be broken, the lineage will be diminished, there will be no good luck, and obstacles to life and succession will occur,
for which reasons Bon temples should be restored and appropriate rites should be undertaken. If the pebble indicative of the destiny ele-
ment, which is placed in the third sector, is white, there will be prosperity and the destiny will flourish, but if it is black, the drum and
cloche will slip from the hands and there will be bad tidings, while the basic and ancillary commitments will be neglected, so that one is
deprived of children and property and the livestock die, for which reasons appropriate rites and recitations – including the longevity rite
and the recitation of the Sūtra of Amitāyus – should be undertaken. If the pebble indicative of the luck element, which is placed in the
fourth sector, is white, the reputation of a Bon teacher will flourish, his students will multiply, and his activities will be limitless; but ifit is
black, he will slip from his throne, good luck will diminish even if rites are performed to attract good luck, while the gods and demons will
become enraged, causing great harm and false accusations, for which reasons appropriate counteracting rites must be undertaken. If the
pebble indicative of the numeric square, which is placed in the fifth sector, is white, it will be most auspicious, the flag of long life will be
untainted, and the lineage will flourish; but if it is black, the ties of the coloured threads utilised alongside the thread-cross will break,
occult power will be dissipated, and there will be imprecations, for which reasons rites of aversion should be undertaken in the four direc-
tions, and specified Bon sūtras should be recited.
Plate 15, fig. 4 (Ms I:f.59): Turquoise dragon (gYu-'brug, utilised for divinations concerning Bon-pos; White Beryl, ff. 3166-317a)?
Plate 15, fig. 4
whether the helmet horns of meteorite will have rusted or not
(gnam-Icags-kyi bya-ru btsa'-yis khyer ma-khyer)
whether the drum and cloche
whether the Phyva-bon priest will
will slip from the hand or not
TURQUOISE DRAGON slip from his seat or not (phyva-bon
(rnga-gshang lag-nas shor
gdan-las 'dred ma-'dred)
ma-shor)
whether the shaft of the divine arrow will be
whether the ties of the coloured threads utilised
broken or not (Iha-mda' rked-nas chag ma-chag)
alongside the thread-cross will break or not
(rgyang-bu'i 'brel-thag chad ma-chad)
5. Steadfast elephant (glang-chen rab-brtarr, White Beryl, f. 317a/b)
In the fifth chart, utilised for divinations concerning ministers, the following five calculations are sequentially made, counting backwards
from the ox year in a friend-relationship with the subject's constitutional type: whether a lord will be isolated from his most intimate
advisor or not (rje'i thugs-gtsigs bral ma-bral); whether the injunctions of the gods will be infringed or not (lha-yi bka'-chad byung ma-
byung); whether good reputation, gold and turquoise will be lost or not (yid-tshang gser-gYu shor ma-shor); whether the magical arrow and
spear will be broken or not ('phrul-gyi mda'-mdung chag ma-chag); and whether the ministerial chair will be left empty or not (blon-po'i
'dun-sa stongs ma-stongs).
Now, if the pebble indicative of the vitality element, which is placed in the first of these sectors, is white, the
lord's activities will be successful, the dominion and subjects will be contented, and there will be no obstacles, but if it is black the
lord will be isolated from his foremost advisor, there will be obstacles to the lifespan even if the ancestors flourished, and there is the
risk that the family line of a minister will be interrupted, for which reasons specific rites of exorcism and aversion of enemies should
be undertaken. If the pebble indicative of the body element, which is placed in the second sector, is white, there will be divine pro-
tection, the lineage of a minister will flourish, and the hostile gods (dgra-lha) will offer support, but if it is black the injunctions of the
protector deities will be infringed, there will be serious diseases, unbearable fevers, wounds and so forth, for which reasons
appropriate rites and charms (gto) should be undertaken or made. If the pebble indicative of the destiny element, which is placed in the
third sector, is white, food, wealth and resources will increase; but if it is black, reputation, gold and turquoise will be lost, and growth
will be short-lived even if obviously present now. There will also be severe punishments or loss of food and wealth, and instability
among the citizens, for which reasons prescribed rites and recitations must not be neglected. If the pebble indicative of the luck
element, which is placed in the fourth sector, is white, there will be long life with few diseases and the subject's purpose will be
fulfilled; but if it is black, the arrow and spear will break or be damaged, while paternal relatives and the subject will be deranged.
For these reasons rites that rescue the life-spirit, attract good luck, and ransom the vitality from death should be undertaken. If the peb-
ble indicative of the numeric square, which is placed in the fifth sector, is white, there will be great fame, and the minister will protect
the kingdom, since he will never leave his seat; but if it is black, the ministerial seat will be deserted, bad reputation will arise, and
there will be unfortunate policy decisions, resulting in the loss of good reputation, gold and turquoise, and the risk of death to
grandsons or daughters, for which reasons rites of exorcism should be applied, and the Five Great Retentive Mantras (gZungs-chen
gra-lnga) should be recited.



393
The thirteen charts of Bal-mo lding-skor
Plate 15, fig. 5
Plate 15, fig.5 (Ms I:f.59): Steadfast elephant (glang-chen rab-brtan, utilised for divinations concerning ministers; White Beryl, f. 317a/b)
whether the ministerial chair will be left empty or not (blon-po'i 'dun-sa stongs ma-stongs)
whether a lord will be isolated
whether the magical arrow and spear
from his most intimate advisor
STEADFAST ELEPHANT
will be broken or not ('phrul-gyi mda'-
or not (rje'i thugs-gtsigs bral
mdung chag ma-chag)
ma-bra)
whether the injunctions of the gods will be
whether good reputation, gold and turquoise will be
lost or not (yid-tshang gser-gYu shor ma-shor)
infringed or not (Iha-yi bka'-chad byung
ma-byung)
6. Striped tiger (Icags-kyi stag khra-bo, White Beryl, ff. 317–318a)
In the sixth chart, utilised for divinations concerning adult males, the following five calculations are sequentially made, counting back-
wards from the tiger year in an enemy-relationship with the subject's constitutional type: whether the arrow of vitality will be broken or
not (Srog-mda' tshigs-su chag ma-chag); whether the tiger-skin quiver, the arrow, sword and spear will be misplaced or not (stag-ral 'khor-
gsum shor ma-shor); whether the flag-bedecked spear and bow will be broken or not (dar-mdung gzhu-mo chag ma-chag); whether one will
be separated from one's thoroughbred steed (gyi-ling) or not (gyi-ling rta-dang bral ma-bral); and whether the heroic wrestling ring will be
deserted or not (dpa'-bo'i 'thab-ra stongs ma-stongs).
Now, if the pebble indicative of the vitality element, which is placed in the first of these sectors, is white, it will
be auspicious in that the lifespan will be lived to the full; but if it is black the arrow of vitality will break, the treacherous spirits of
the tombs (dur-sri) will arise, and there will be life-threatening wounds inflicted on oneself, one's paternal relatives, or siblings, for
which reasons rites to ransom the vitality from death should be undertaken, along with long-life empowerments and exorcism of
the spirits of treachery (sri). If the pebble indicative of the body element, which is placed in the second sector, is white all will be well,
but if it is black the tiger-skin and leopard-skin quivers will be misplaced, while obstacles and infectious diseases will subse-
quently emerge, for which reason protective amulets should be worn, and votive reliquaries equalling the subject's own age in
number should be made. If the pebble indicative of the destiny element, which is placed in the third sector, is white, food and wealth
will be massed, the paternal relatives will flourish, all necessities will be obtained and the spear will have a white flag attached to it
indicating good auspices; but if it is black, the flag-bedecked spear and bow will break, there will be dangers to gold, turquoise,
food, property, livestock and residence. For this reason the amulet promoting fortune should be worn, while gtor-ma offerings should
be presented to the hostile gods (dgra-lha) and male gods (pho-lha). If the pebble indicative of the luck element, which is placed in
the fourth sector, is white, rumours will be quelled, there will be no quarrels or wars, and whatever one considers will be
accomplished; but if it is black, one will be separated from one's gyi-ling steed, there will be rumours, quarrels will flare among sons
or daughters, and the family will die in exile, for which reasons particular rites should be undertaken to restore luck and exorcise hos-
tile forces. If the pebble indicative of the numeric square, which is placed in the fifth sector, is white, there will be great heroism, the line-
age will flourish, and one will be respected among the ranks of the heroic; but if it is black, the wrestling ring of valour will be
deserted, heroism will diminish and there will be hardships, for which reasons rites should be undertaken to rescue the life-spirit,
and wrathful empowerments should be requested.
Dead
Plate 15, fig. 6 (Ms 1:9.59): Striped tiger (Icags-kyi stag khra-bo, utilised for divinations concerning adult males; White Beryl, ff. 317b-318a)
whether the flag-bedecked spear and bow will be broken or not (dar-mdung gzhu-mo chag ma-chag8
Plate 15, fig. 6
whether the tiger-skin quiver,
whether one will be separated from
the arrow, sword and spear will
STRIPED TIGER
one's thoroughbred steed or not (gyi-ling
rta-dang bral ma-bra)
be misplaced or not (stag-ral
'khor-gsum shor ma-shor
whether the arrow of vitality will be broken or
not (srog-mda' tshigs-su chag ma-chag)
whether the wrestling ring of valour will be deserted
or not (dpa'-bo'i 'thab-ra stongs ma-stongs)
7. Red owl (sribs-bya dmar, White Beryl, f. 318a/b)
In the seventh chart, utilised for divinations concerning women and nuns (mo-btsun), the following five calculations are sequen-
tially made, counting backwards from the mouse year in a mother-relationship with the subject's constitutional type: whether the
white silk pelmet will hang down or not (dar-dkar sham-bu mtha'-nas zags-sam ma-zags); whether the cord of the subject's turquoise
will break or not (gyu-yi lung-thag chad ma-chad); whether the glorious sun will set or not (dpal-gyi nyi-ma nub ma-nub); whether



394
The White Beryl
the spring of existence will become dry or not (srid-kyi chu-mig bskams ma-bskams); and whether a child will slip from the mother's lap
or not (pang-nas bu-shor byung ma-byung).
Now, if the pebble indicative of the vitality element, which is placed in the first of these sectors, is white, there
will be long life, great advantages and whatever one wishes to do may be achieved; but if it is black, the white silk pelmet will hang
down, the spirits of treachery (srl) will arise, and there will be obstacles to the lifespan, for which reasons appropriate rites of restora-
tion and amulets should be prepared, along with tshe-phur rites,lº and ritual charms promoting vitality. If the pebble indicative of
the body element, which is placed in the second sector, is white, resources will be amassed, the woman will have five or six sons, and
there will be no diseases; but if it is black, the turquoise, which is the woman's life-supporting talisman, will have a broken thread, which
will be inauspicious for the sons, husband, maternal aunts and siblings, and the body, prone to ill-health, will be ineffectual, for which rea-
sons an amulet promoting the body element should be worn, the gTsug-tor dkar-mo should be recited many times, and so forth. If the peb-
ble indicative of the destiny element, which is placed in the third sector, is white, the father's brother will flourish, the sea of glory will be
intact, and there will be great fortune and resources, but if it is black the glorious sun will set, the father's brother, husband and maternal
uncle will experience great ups and downs, one will be handicapped by plague-causing spirits, and there will be great loss of wealth in the
sector of the maternal aunt, for which reasons the treacherous spirits of loss (god-sri)" should be exorcised, amulets promoting the des-
tiny element should be worn, charitable donations should be made, and rites averting misfortune and promoting good fortune should be
applied. If the pebble indicative of the luck element, which is placed in the fourth sector, is white there will be good reputation, and what-
ever one wishes will be accomplished, but if it is black the spring of existence will become dry, there will be plagues, fevers, moving of the
household, bad reputation, and false accusations, for which reasons amulets promoting the luck element should be worn and appropriate
ritual charms should be made. If the pebble indicative of the numeric square, which is placed in the fifth sector, is white, the family line
will flourish and new-born children will emerge swiftly, but if it is black a child will slip from its mother's lap, it will be hard to raise chil-
dren, the couple will endure many sorrows, and there is the risk of a child being carried off by demons, for which reasons the retentive
mantra chart which secures existence should be made, and the rites that rescue the life-spirit should be applied by a potent mantrin or
Buddhist monk.
Plate 15, fig. 7 (Ms I: f.59): Red owl (sribs-bya dmar, utilised for divinations concerning women and nuns; White Beryl, f. 318a/b)
Plate 15, fig. 7
whether the glorious sun will set or not (dpal-gyi nyi-ma nub ma-nub)
whether the cord of the subject's
whether the spring of existence will
turquoise will break or not
RED OWL
become dry or not (srid-kyi chu-
mig bskams ma-bskams)
(gYu-yi lung-thag chad ma-chad)
whether the white silk pelmet will hang down or not
whether a child will slip from its mother's lap or
(dar-dkar sham-bu mtha'-nas zags-sam ma-zags)
not (pang-nas bu-shor byung ma-byung)
8. Fiery gemstone (nor-bu 'od-'bar, White Beryl, ff. 318b-319a)
In the eighth chart, utilised for divinations concerning children, the following five calculations are sequentially made, counting back-
wards from the tiger year in an enemy-relationship with the subject's constitutional type: whether the arms of the svāstika will break or
not (gYung-drung rva-ba rked-nas chag-gam ma-chag); whether the golden fish will emerge onto dry land or not (gser-nya skam-du thon ma-
thon); whether the brocade clothing will be carried off by a river or not (gos-chung chu-yis khyer ma-khyer); whether the children's play-
ground will be left empty or not (byis-pa'i rtsed-sa stongs ma-stongs); and whether the rosewood bow and arrow will be broken or not (se-
mda' se-gzhu chag ma-chag).
Now, if the pebble indicative of the vitality element, which is placed in the first of these sectors, is white, it augurs
well for children, girls will prosper, and there will be no obstacles to the vitality of children; but if it is black, the arms of the svāstika will
break and there will be ill-health and sorrows, for which reasons the empowerment of long life should be received, the Sūtra of Amitāyus
should be recited, and appropriate ritual charms made. If the pebble indicative of the body element, which is placed in the second sector, is
white there will be no ill-health or demonic possession, but if it is black the golden fish will emerge onto dry land, there will be oppression,
and harm will be inflicted by the demons associated with the mother and the maternal aunt, for which reasons the treacherous spirits (sri)
should be exorcised, amulets promoting the body element should be worn, a stūpa should be built and offerings made to the serpentine spir-
its. If the pebble indicative of the destiny element, which is placed in the third sector, is white, food and wealth will increase and the child will
be associated with kind persons; but if it is black, brocade clothes will be carried off by a river, and the child will face death and be oppressed
by treacherous spirits of childhood (chung-sri). If the pebble indicative of the luck element, which is placed in the fourth sector, is white, there
will be no demonic afflictions and the child will be beloved by its parents, but if it is black the playground will be deserted, the child will be
smitten by stroke, there will be sorrows and potential fatalities, for which reasons prayers that restore luck should be undertaken, along
with ablutions. If the pebble indicative of the numeric square, which is placed in the fifth sector, is white, the life-spirit of a child will be
secure, and there will be no obstacles, but ifit is black the rosewood arrow and bow will be broken, the life-spirit will decline, and there is the
danger of the lifespan being diminished, for which reasons virtuous actions should be performed, and a talismanic turquoise should be worn.
Plate 15, fig. 8 (Ms I:f. 59): Fiery gem (nor-bu 'od-'bar, utilised for divinations concerning children; White Beryl, ff. 3186–319a)
whether the children's playground will be left empty or not (byis-pa'i rtsed-sa stongs ma-stongs)
Plate 15, fig. 8
whether the rosewood bow and
whether the brocade clothing will be
arrow will be broken or not
FIERY GEMSTONE
carried off by a river or not
(se-mda' se-gzhu chag ma-chag)
(gos-chung chu-yis khyer ma-khyen 12
whether the arms of the svāstika will break or not
whether the golden fish will emerge onto dry land
(gYung-drung rva-ba rked-nas chag-gam ma-chag)
or not (gser-nya skam-du thon ma-thon)



395
The thirteen charts of Bal-mo lding-skor
9. Blue peacock (mthing-gi rma-bya, White Beryl, f. 319a/b)
In the ninth chart, utilised for divinations concerning young wives (chung gzhon-nu), the following five calculations are sequentially
made, counting backwards from the dog year in a mother-relationship with the subject's constitutional type: whether the dark green
water weeds will dry or not (mthing-gi lu-ma bskams ma-bskams); whether the hollyhock will be blighted by frost or not (ha-lo sad-kyis khyer
ma-khyer); whether the arms of the svāstika will break or not (gYung-drung ra-ba ral ma-ral); whether the silver-white mirror will be
cracked or not (dngul-dkar me-long rdol ma-rdol); and whether the spindling yard will be emptied of woollen threads or not (bal-skud
phongs-ra stongs ma-stongs).
Now, if the pebble indicative of the vitality element, which is placed in the first of these sectors, is white, there
will be long life free from diseases and demonic possession; but if it is black, the water weeds will wither, and the lifespan will be
harmed, for which reasons the Sūtra of Amitāyus should be recited and the longevity empowerment received. If the pebble indicative of
the body element, which is placed in the second sector, is white, there will be no diseases and a beneficial existence, but if it is black the
hollyhock will be blighted by frost, existence will not flourish, ill-health will ensue, and sons or daughters will endure ups and downs,
for which reasons an amulet promoting the body element should be worn and ritual charms should be made to eliminate misfortune.
If the pebble indicative of the destiny element, which is placed in the third sector, is white the young wife will be a pleasant girl, and
there will be an abundance of ornaments, clothes, food and wealth, but if it is black the arms of the svāstika will break, and it will be
inauspicious for the girl and for neighbours, requiring the performance of exorcism, the recitation of a retentive mantra that
promotes precious things, and the ritual attraction of good luck. If the pebble indicative of the luck element, which is placed in the
fourth sector, is white, the wife will have a fine household and be loved by all even if she is ineffectual, but if it is black, the mirror will
corrode, bad reputation will arise and it will be inauspicious for the mother and later generations, for which reasons an amulet promot-
ing the luck element should be worn, and hundreds of butter lamps should be offered. If the pebble indicative of the numeric square,
which is placed in the fifth sector, is white, the lifespan will be secure and the vase of longevity will be full; but if it is black, the spin-
dling yard will be emptied, its contents slipping from the hands, and relatives and servants will endure sorrows. The vase of
longevity will therefore be emptied and the lineage will be afflicted by ill-health, requiring long-life empowerments to be received
and necessitating the performance of other appropriate rites.
Plate 15, fig. 9 (Ms I: f.59): Blue peacock (mthing-gi rma-bya, utilised for divinations concerning young wives; White Beryl, f. 319a/b) 13
whether the hollyhock will be blighted by frost or not (ha-lo sad-kyis khyer ma-khyer)
Plate 15, fig. 9
whether the arms of the svāstika
whether the silver-white mirror will
will break or not (gYung-drung
BLUE PEACOCK
be cracked or not
ra-ba ral ma-ra)
whether the spindling yard will be emptied of
woollen threads or not (bal-skud phongs-ra
(dngul-dkar me-long rdol ma-rdo)
whether the dark green water weeds will dry or
not (mthing-gi lu-ma bskams ma-bskams) 14
stongs ma-stongs)
10. Gold dragon, bird, turtle and tiger (gser-gyi rgyi-seng, White Beryl, ff. 319b-320a)
In the tenth chart, utilised for divinations concerning servants, the following five calculations are sequentially made, counting back-
wards from the bird year in a mother-relationship with the subject's constitutional type:15 whether the bow and its five arrows will be
lost or not (mda'-Inga gzhu-gcig shor ma-shor); whether there will be royal or ministerial punishment or not (rje-blon bka'-chad byung
ma-byung); whether the household of a male servant will be obliterated or not (pho-khyim things-kyi bkag ma-bkag); whether the yoke of
misfortune will have to be borne or not (byur-gyi gnya'-shing 'khur mi-'khur); and whether the food allocation, like a mountainous valley,
will be impeded or not, or whether the purpose of a subject will transgress the law or not (ri-klungs za-thang 'gags-min-nam 'bangs-kyi
yul-don 'gal mi-'gal).
Now, if the pebble indicative of the vitality element, which is placed in the first of these sectors, is white,
servants will be most useful, they will have long life and will bring good luck, but if it is black the five arrows and bow will slip from
the hands, the servants will be useless even if they wish to help, there will be the risk of royal punishment, luck will diminish,
and the lifespan will be interrupted, for which reasons an amulet securing the vitality should be worn, and the treacherous spirits
(sri) that provoke loss should be exorcised. If the pebble indicative of the body element, which is placed in the second sector, is white,
the servants will carry out all that is demanded of them and they will be free from ill-health or demonic possession and other obstacles;
but if it is black, they will incur royal or ministerial punishment, there will be accusations, and they will be prone to many diseases
and sufferings, for which reasons an amulet promoting the body element should be worn and offerings made to the protector deities.
If the pebble indicative of the destiny element, which is placed in the third sector, is white, the servants will be of great use to their mas-
ter, even if they are disabled, while food, wealth and resources will be amassed; but if it is black, the house of a male servant will be obliter-
ated, indicating that the servants and wealth will be exhausted, and there will be losses to livestock and property, while food and
wealth will be diminished, for which reasons rites restoring prosperity should be performed, along with ablutions and many recitations
of the Dhāranī of Vasudharā. If the pebble indicative of the luck element, which is placed in the fourth sector, is white, the lord will not
fall into the clutches of demons, and the servants will have a good reputation, while sons, wealth and resources will be glorious; but if it
is black, the yoke of misfortune will have to be borne, there will be unbearable burdens, punishments administered by superiors, and
false accusations, for which reasons appropriate counteracting rites must be performed. If the pebble indicative of the numeric
square, which is placed in the fifth sector, is white, the servants will thrive within the house of paternal relatives, and the subject's own
life will be secure, but if it is black their purpose will transgress the law, the life-spirit of the servants will diminish, there will be great
loss of wealth and the allocation of food will be restricted, for which reasons resources should be charitably offered, along with suppli-
catory prayers and rites promoting prosperity.



396
The White Beryl
Plate 15, fig. 10 (Ms 1: f. 59): Gold tiger, dragon, turtle and bird (gser-gyi rgyi-seng, utilised for divinations concerning servants; White Beryl, ff. 3196–320a) 16
whether the bow and its five arrows will be lost or not (mda'-Inga gzhu-gcig shor ma-shor)
whether there will be royal or
GOLD TIGER, DRAGON,
whether the yoke of misfortune will
ministerial punishment or not
TURTLE AND BIRD
have to be borne or not (byur-gyi
(rje-blon bka'-chad byung
gnya'-shing 'khur mi-'khur)
ma-byung)
whether the food allocation, like a mountainous
whether the household of a male servant will be
obliterated or not (pho-khyim thibs-kyi bkag
ma-bkag 17
valley, will be impeded or not; or whether the
purpose of a subject will transgress the law or
not (ri-klungs za-thang 'gags-min-nam
'bangs-kyi yul-don 'gal mi-'gah
Plate 15, fig. 10
11. Golden estate (Iha-lug ser-po, White Beryl, f. 320a/b)
In the eleventh chart, utilised for divinations concerning land, estates and treasure, the following five calculations are sequentially made,
counting backwards from the pig year in an enemy-relationship with the subject's constitutional type: whether there will be a mistaken
emigration or not (yul-la 'pho-'phyugs byas ma-byas); whether the gods of the roof-top prayer-flags will fade or not (rtse-lha yar-ram ma-
yar-ba); whether the stove will be placed to the side or not (sgyed-bu glo-'dogs byas ma-byas); whether the gold pillars and turquoise beams
will be broken or not (gser-ka gYu-gdung chag ma-chag); and whether others will place a marker on the father's fields or not (pha-zhing
mis tho btsugs ma-gtsugs).
Now, if the pebble indicative of the vitality element, which is placed in the first of these sectors, is white, the
estates will be excellent and they will be maintained by a son; but if it is black, the subject will emigrate while the estate will face east and
be afflicted by serpentine spirits and plague-causing spirits, for which reasons one should perform rites pertaining to the spirit lords of
the soil, and make gtor-ma offerings to the eight great serpentine sprits (klu-chen brgyad), along with thread-crosses dedicated to the spirit
lords of the soil. If the pebble indicative of the body element, which is placed in the second sector, is white, the prayer-flags dedicated to
the male gods (pho-lha) will stand erect on the roof of the house, and the master will never be separated from the house, but if it is black
the prayer-flags dedicated to these roof-top deities will fade, the ownership of the estate and the family lineage will be interrupted, and
there will be afflictions due to strokes and losses inauspicious to the household, for which reasons appropriate rites should be undertaken
in praise of the hostile gods (dgra-lha). If the pebble indicative of the destiny element, which is placed in the third sector, is white, the wife
will provide satisfying food to guests even if she is very miserly; but if it is black, the stove will be pushed to the side and meagre food will
be provided, for which reason a specific amulet known as bsris-rme'i 'khor-lo should be concealed under the stove and an amulet promoting
the destiny element of the cook should be worn. If the pebble indicative of the luck element, which is placed in the fourth sector, is white,
the native land will be secure, and there will be no scandals in the sector of the grandparents; but if it is black, the pillars of gold and
beams of turquoise will be broken, scandals will emerge, and there is the risk of the house being damaged, for which reasons appropriate
counteracting rites must be undertaken. If the pebble indicative of the numeric square, which is placed in the fifth sector, is white, the
ownership of the estate will not be disputed by others, the workers will have long health free from disease, and the harvest will flourish,
but if it is black others will place a marker on the paternal estate and prosperity will diminish, for which reasons offerings should be made
to the countryside deities (yul-lha), and one should persevere in rites that attract prosperity.
JAM
ULL
KO
ON
Plate 15, fig. 11
Plate 15, fig. 11 (Ms I: f. 59): Golden estate (Iha-lug ser-po; utilised for divinations concerning land, estates, and treasure; White Beryl, f. 320a/b)" •
whether the stove will be placed to the side or not (sgyed-bu glo-'dogs byas ma-byas)
whether the gods of the roof-top
whether others will place a marker on
prayer-flags will fade or not
GOLDEN ESTATE the father's fields or not (pha-zhing
(rtse-lha yar-ram ma-yar-ba)
mis tho btsugs ma-gtsugs)
whether there will be a mistaken emigration or whether the gold pillars and turquoise beams will be
not (yul-la 'pho-'phyugs byas ma-byas)
broken or not (gser-ka gYu-gdung chag ma-chag)
12. Golden vase (gser-gyi bum-pa; White Beryl, ff. 3206–321b)
In the twelfth chart, utilised for divinations concerning gold, silver, copper, iron, turquoise and so forth, the following five calculations
are sequentially made, counting backwards from the pig year in a friend-relationship with the subject's constitutional type: whether
grease will stick to the king of golden mountains or not, or whether a mirror will be corroded or not (gser-gyi ri-rgyal-la mkhris-zhag
chags-sam ma-chags-sam me-long gra'-dris gos ma-gos); whether the great luminosity of a turquoise lake will be damaged or not (gYu-
mtsho 'od-chen rdol ma-rdol); whether the shape-shifting phra-men-ma'' can newly ingress within a precious bowl or not (phra-men rin-cen
yol-go-la gsar zhugs ma-zhugs-pa); whether the cuckoo that cares for a hundred or a hundred thousand chicks will be blinded or not, or
whether the thread of an auspicious turquoise will be broken or not (brgya-yi bye'u 'bum bye'u zangs-mig long-ngam ma-long-ngam phyva-
gYu'i mig-thag chad ma-chad); and whether copper cooking pots will be heaped together or not ('gel-zangs rdab-tu 'gril ma-'gril).
Now, if the pebble indicative of the vitality element, which is placed in the first of these sectors, is white, former
wealth, food and resources will never be exhausted, but if it is black the golden mirror will corrode, wealth will be diminished, or else
demons or bewitchers will come in pursuit, for which reasons the treacherous spirits (srl) that provoke loss should be exorcised, and
recitations of the Dhāraṇī of Vasudharā should be made. If the pebble indicative of the body element, which is placed in the second sector, is
white, the body will be bedecked with turquoise, while ornaments, food and resources will increase; but if it is black, there will be a film of
oil on a turquoise lake, prosperity will be damaged, and the great luminosity of the lake will fade, for which reasons rites to restore pros-
perity and propitiate Vasudharā (nor-lha) should be performed. If the pebble indicative of the destiny element, which is placed in the third



397
The thirteen charts of Bal-mo lding-skor
sector, is white, sons will enjoy their fathers' property and the wealth of all directions will be amassed; but if it is black, the shape-shifting
phra-men-ma will ingress within one's bowl so that even if the parents do possess wealth and resources the son will squander them, and he
will be impoverished whatever he does, while wealth and prosperity will decline, for which reasons an amulet promoting the destiny ele-
ment should be attached and recitations promoting prosperity should be made. If the pebble indicative of the luck element, which is placed
in the fourth sector, is white, it will be auspicious for the family wealth and the father's formerly renowned lineage will confer fame on the
son, while wealth will never be exhausted; but ifit is black, the thread of the turquoise of prosperity will be broken and resplendent wealth
will fall into the clutches of another, for which reasons rites restoring the luck aspect and exorcising the treacherous spirits of childhood
(chung-sri) should be undertaken. If the pebble indicative of the numeric square, which is placed in the fifth sector, is white, all that one for-
merly had will be presently possessed, resplendent objects of wealth will bring prosperity, and there will be an increase of moveable prop-
erty that fills the storerooms even if unintentionally amassed; but if it is black, the copper cooking pots will be heaped together, luck-
bringing objects of wealth and food will fall into the hands of others, prosperity will diminish, and good reputation will be lost to another,
or else wealth will be dissipated, for which reasons appropriate counteracting rites should be undertaken to restore prosperity.
Plate 15, fig. 12 (Ms 1: f. 59): Golden vase (gser-gyi bum-pa; utilised for divinations concerning precious metals and gems; White Beryl, ff. 320b-321b)
whether the phra-men-ma will newly ingress within a precious bowl or not
(phra-men rin-cen yol-go-la gsar zhugs ma-zhugs-pa)
whether the great luminosity of a
whether the cuckoo that cares for a
turquoise lake will be impaired or
hundred or a hundred thousand chicks
not (gYu-mtsho 'od-chen rdol
GOLDEN VASE
will be blinded or not; or whether the
Qaa
ma-rdo)
thread of an auspicious turquoise will
be broken or not (brgya-yi bye'u 'bum
byeu zangs-mig long-ngam ma-
Bao
long-ngam phyva-gyu'i mig-thag
chad ma-chad 20
whether grease will stick to the king of golden
Plate 15, fig. 12
whether copper cooking pots will be heaped
together or not ('gel-zangs rdab-tu 'gril ma-'grih
mountains or not; or whether a mirror will be
corroded or not (gser-gyi ri-rgyal-la mkhris-
zhag chags-sam ma-chags-sam me-long
gYa'-dris gos ma-gos)
13. Adult wild yak ('brong-chen dar-ma, White Beryl, ff. 321b-322a)
In the thirteenth chart, utilised for divinations concerning horses, sheep and cattle, the following five calculations are sequentially made,
counting from the fire ox year in the case of a subject with a wood element:21 whether the saddle and bridle of a thoroughbred steed will
be left unused or not (gyi-ling sga-srab stongs ma-stongs); whether the legs of a riding horse will be broken or not (yo-ma lag-pa chad ma-
chad); whether a stud yak will be castrated or not (zhol-chen rtsid-pa byid ma-byid); whether the divine 'bri will roll down a ravine or not
(lha-'bri gad-la 'gril ma-'gril); and whether the line of ewes will be interrupted or not (gYang-mo star-thag chad ma-chad).
Now, if the pebble indicative of the vitality element, which is placed in the first of these sectors, is white, horses
and donkeys will be of great use, they will be good station animals even if physically weak, and they will make excellent riding horses; but
if it is black, the gyi-ling steed will be bereft of its saddle and bridle, there will be a great loss of horses and a lion-like stallion will be
weaker than a donkey, for which reasons rites should be undertaken to maintain the prosperity of horses and appease the eight malign
mountain spirits (gnod-sbyin brgyad). If the pebble indicative of the body element, which is placed in the second sector, is white, horses and
livestock will thrive, as an inexhaustible treasure, but if it is black the legs of a riding horse will be broken and the herds will not increase,
for which reason the treacherous spirits afflicting horses (rta-srı) should be exorcised and an effigy of the livestock animals made. If the
pebble indicative of the destiny element, which is placed in the third sector, is white, yaks will be produced, there will be no loss of live-
stock, a male will have excellent offspring, and the variegated herds will be most auspicious; but if it is black, the stud yak will be cas-
trated and it will be inauspicious for the herds of livestock, for which reasons gtor-ma offerings and specified rites should be undertaken to
protect the herds and restore prosperity. If the pebble indicative of the luck element, which is placed in the fourth sector, is white, the cat-
tle herds will thrive, and there will be no losses; but if it is black, the divine 'bri will roll down a ravine, the herds of female cattle will not
thrive, there will be misfortunes, no advantage, bad reputation and losses in the sector of fertility, for which reasons specified recitations
and ritual charms should be applied. If the pebble indicative of the numeric square, which is placed in the fifth sector, is white, all will be
well for the flocks of smaller livestock and sheep in particular will thrive, without falling into ravines, while prosperity will prevail
among such flocks of smaller livestock; but if it is black, the line of sheep will be interrupted, and it will be particularly inauspicious for
ewes, for which reasons precipices should be fenced off, and the treacherous spirits that provoke such losses (god-sri) should be exorcised,
and an appropriate effigy of a sheep or goat should be made. In these ways, negative prognostications can be made positive.
Plate 15, fig. 13 (Ms l: f.59): Adult wild yak ('brong-chen dar-ma, utilised for divinations concerning horses, sheep and cattle; White Beryl, ff. 321b-322a) 22
whether the divine 'bri will roll down a ravine or not (Iha-'bri gad-la 'gril ma-'grih
Plate 15, fig. 13
whether the legs of a riding horse
whether a studyak will be castrated
will be broken or not (yo-ma lag-
ADULT WILD YAK
or not (zhol-chen rtsid-pa
pa chad ma-chad)
whether the saddle and bridle of a thoroughbred
steed will be left unused or not (gyi-ling sga-srab
byid ma-byid)
whether the line of ewes will be interrupted or not
(gyang-mo star-thag chad ma-chad)
stongs ma-stongs 29



Conclusion



399
The manuscript that forms the illustrative basis of the present work is the most comprehensive, elaborate and aesthetically refined exem-
plar that is known to exist within the sphere of Tibetan astrology and divination, and demonstrates the principal themes of elemental
divination as outlined in the White Beryl. It is important to reiterate that the practical application of elemental divination, as illustrated in
these ninety-four folios, continues (alongside traditional medicine) to have a significant role in Tibetan society whenever yearly
almanacs are prepared and when detailed readings are requested concerning natal horoscope, marriage prospects, obstacle years, ill-
health and death. It would be virtually impossible to implement the complex calculations presented in the schematic charts, or to com-
prehend the contemporary relevance of the prognostications outlined in White Beryl, without access to the living oral transmission of ele-
mental divination and its learned practitioners who are based at the various sMan-rtsis-khang institutes. The methodology of elemental
divination seeks to clarify the ostensible obscurities of the cycle of birth and death with reference to the relative world. In its proper
context it does not contradict the higher understandings of Buddhism, which seek to terminate the cycle of birth and death through the
realisation of selflessness and emptiness, but rather complements spiritual development by providing a systematic approach to the exi-
gencies of conventional life. It is not therefore surprising that the most renowned exponents of elemental divination in Tibetan society
have been renunciate monks or laymen motivated by the compassionate aspiration of the bodhisattva vows. Imbued with such ideals,
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī in his conclusion to Moonbeams (ff. 39a-40a) declines to elaborate on destructive and hostile divinatory techniques:
By virtue of any eloquence present [in this text],
May all beings excellently realise the two modes of selflessness
Moreover, although there are explained to be (other techniques),
Of importance to both the living and the dead,
Including geomancy,' and ancillary investigations (pertaining to
natal horoscope),
Along with peaceful and harsh rites,' or destructive means, 4
Through which all doctrines are secured,
At this ſjuncture), encouraged by certain intelligent persons,
And despite the failings of my recollection,
This synopsis of the mere basics (required) for deploying the pebbles
according to the computational charts,
Was written by the little monk Dharmaśrī
To pass the time over a period of some days,
And by relying on this science (of relative truth]
Which highlights the self
May they find total liberation!
Through which one brings about the destruction of inimical foes,
Or the transference of one's own obstacles to others,
When he was unable to (properly engage in Buddhist practice.
Those who wish to know them should inspect more detailed texts.
May learned persons forgive the errors it contains!
This instruction on elemental divination entitled Moonbeams ('byung-rtsis man-ngag zla-ba'i 'od-zer) was hand-written at the beginning of a twelve-year cycle within the sexagenary cycle, by the mad little monk
[Lo-chen Dharmaśrī). It is a rough memorandum of a few points, which he had ascertained through the kindness of his learned masters. Let virtue prevail!
Mangalam!
Benediction
All the hidden joys and sorrows of living beings
Are entirely distinct ostensible phenomena,
Similar to the pattern of a silken garment.
This excellent text which manifestly reveals them
Was composed by Dharmaśrī.?
Opposite and Above Details from Plate 11, fig. 10



402
The White Beryl
Notes
Full bibliographic references are given in the Bibliography,
p. 422. Abbreviations are listed on p. 412.
Introduction
i In Tibetan translation a work attributed to Garga and entitled Thub-
pa chen-po drang-srong gar-gas ltas-kyi rnam-pa bstan-pa zhes-bya-ba'i
gtsug-lag (T. 4321) is extant.
2 According to tradition, it was Sucandra, the first great king of
Śambhala, who requested and redacted the Tantra of the Wheel of
Time after receiving its transmission from Śākyamuni Buddha.
The extant Abridged Tantra of the Wheel of Time was subsequently
redacted by Mañjuśrīkīrti, the first in the line of the Kulika kings of
Śambhala; and the latter's son Kulika Pundarika wrote the most
important commentary, entitled Taintless Light (Vimalaprabhā). This
hidden land of Sambhala is said to be presently ruled by the twenty-
first Kulika king (1927–2027), and there is a messianic prediction to
the effect that during the reign of Rudra, the twenty-fifth Kulika
(circa 2425), the Buddhist traditions of Sambhala will emerge
triumphant after a military campaign which overwhelms the
opposing forces of barbarism.
3 The introduction of the Tantra of the Wheel of Time to India is
considered to have been the work of Chilupa and his disciple
Nādapāda, circa 966. Later, the tantra was introduced into Tibet by
Somanātha of Kashmir and Atiśa of Bengal circa 1024. The first
Tibetan sexagenary cycle dates from 1027.
4 The Islamic calendrical era is dated from 16 July 622. However it
was in 624 that Muhammed's forces inflicted their first defeat upon
the troops of Mecca.
5 On the calculations employed in Indian-based astrology (dkar-rtsis),
see P. Cornu, Tibetan Astrology, pp. 127-152 and 198–212, and
D. Schuh, Untersuchungen zur Geschichte der tibetischen
Kalenderrechnung, pp. 47-130. A more detailed analysis is offered by
the contemporary Tibetan scholars Mi-'gyur rDo-rje and Mig-dmar
Tshe-ring in Bod-kyi rtsis-rig kun-'dus chen-mo, Vol. 2, pp. 25–73.
6 The ‘outer' Wheel of Time is concerned with the macrocosm of space
and time; the ‘inner' Wheel of Time with the microcosm of the
energy channels, currents and seminal points within the subtle body
of the meditator; and the 'extraneous' Wheel of Time with the
generation stage (utpattikrama) and perfection stage
(sampannakrama) of meditation, through which impurities are
transformed into the fully-fledged realisation of the Wheel of Time.
See P. Cornu, Tibetan Astrology, pp. 25–27.
7 The lineage transmitted by Bu-ston derives from the translations of
Rva Lo-tsā-ba, in contrast to Dol-po-pa's transmission which derives
from the earlier translations of 'Gro Lo-tsā-ba. The Karma bka'-
brgyud lineage transmitted by Karmapa ini Rang-byung rDo-rje is
distinct from these two. On the astrological treatises of Bu-ston and
Rang-byung rDo-rje in particular, see also D. Schuh, Untersuchungen
zur Geschichte der tibetischen Kalenderrechnung, pp. 32–36. 'Jam-mgon
Kong-sprul's account does not, however, mention the earlier Sa-
skya-pa commentaries on the Tantra of the Wheel of Time, which were
composed by Grags-pa rGyal-mtshan and Chos-rgyal 'phags-pa. See
D. Schuh, op. cit., pp. 30–32. For a more detailed account
differentiating nine distinct Tibetan lineages of this tantra, see the
article by Dr Tshul-khrims rGyal-mtshan in Bod-kyi rtsis-rig kun-
'dus chen-mo, Vol. 1, pp. 69–282.
8 This text has recently been republished in Beijing by Krung-go'i
bod-kyi shes-rig dpe-skrun-khang.
9 White Beryl (Vaidūrya dKar-po) is the major source for the present
work. The content of Dharmasri's 'Illuminating Sun (Nyin-byed snang-
ba) is discussed in D. Schuh, op. cit., pp. 40–41.
10 On these texts of the mTshur-phu school, see D. Schuh, op. cit.,
pp. 81-83.
11 For a brief analysis of the works of Karma Nges-legs bsTan-'dzin,
see D. Schuh, op. cit., p. 42. ‘Among them, the Nyer-mkho'i bum-bzang
expounds elemental divination (nag-rtsis/ 'byung-rtsis) rather than
astrology (skar-rtsis), which is the subject of his Mun-sel nyi-ma nyer-
mkho'i 'dod-pa 'jo-ba'i bum-bzang and his gSer-gyi thur-ma.
12 This is a reference to the mythological conflicts between the devas
and asuras, which are the subject of the Purānic literature of ancient
India. For a Tibetan account, see Patrul Rinpoche, The Words of My
Perfect Teacher, pp. 92–99.
13 Research scholars at the sMan-rtsis-khang in Lhasa have recently
republished this essential Tibetan commentary of the Phug-pa
school, in Chengdu at the Sichuan Nationalities Publishing House.
See Bod-kyi rtsis-rig kun-'dus chen-mo, Vol. 3, pp. 1–485.
14 For a detailed account of the lineage-holders who transmitted the
Svarodaya Tantra in India and Tibet, see Dr Tsul-khrims rGyal-
mtshan's article in Bod-kyi rtsis-rigs kun-'dus chen-mo, Vol. 1,
pp. 429-472.
15 The Collected Works of Mi-pham Rin-po-che (Mi-pham gsung-'bum), in
twenty-six volumes, are available in a xylographic edition, published
at the sDe-dge Printing Press in Khams, East Tibet.
16 An abridged version of my unpublished monograph on this
Svarodaya Scroll is included in R. Thurman and D. Walden, Sacred
Symbols: The Ritual Art of Tibet, pp. 162–165.
17 The first legendary emperor, reputedly Fuxi, devised the eight
trigrams and the Ho Tu symbol of cosmic order, in which the four
directions, four seasons and five elements are symbolically
represented by rows of white and black figures. Arithmetic and
astronomy were subsequently codified in the reign of Huang Di, the
‘Yellow Emperor'; while the lunar calendar and its intercalary
months are attributed to the third legendary emperor Yao
(2357–2286 BC), and the nine numeric squares to the Emperor Yu
(2206-2197 Bc) who reputedly saw their marks on the shell of a
turtle emerging from the River Lo. The restructuring of the eight
trigrams in their present formation and the composition of the
foremost Chinese divinatory text on the trigrams, known as the
Book of Changes (I Ching), are attributed to King Wan (circa 1152 bc)
and his son, the Duke of Zhou. See also W.K. Chu and W.A. Sherril,
The Astrology of I Ching, p. 715, and P. Cornu, Tibetan Astrology,
pp. 21-23. An interesting article on the evolution of the various
calendrical systems utilised by successive Chinese dynasties, written
by Dr Yumpa of the Lhasa sMan-rtsis-khang, is included in Bod-kyi
rtsis-rig kun-'dus chen-mo, Vol. 1, pp. 548–574.
18 None of the many texts which were reputedly translated from
Chinese into Tibetan appears to be known to contemporary
sinologists - such as Marc Kalinowski, Carole Morgan and Françoise
Wang-Toutain - who have researched the diverse Chinese mantic
traditions. The Chinese lineage-holders of the Tang and Song
periods to whom these texts are attributed and whose names and
icons appear in the uppermost cartouche of our manuscript folios
(Ms I, ff. 6–55) are equally unknown at the present day. This gives
rise to speculation that many of these texts are actually indigenous
Tibetan compositions or that they were redacted from an oral
tradition which is no longer extant.
19 Dr Yumpa in his article entitled ‘rGya-rtsis bod-du dar-tshul cung-
zad bshad-pa shel-dkar me-long', contained in Bod-kyi rtsis-rig kun-
'dus chen-mo, Vol. 1, pp. 548–574, contrasts the traditional systems of
divination which were highly regulated by Chinese emperors until
the end of the Ming dynasty (mid-seventeenth century) with the
innovatory techniques that emerged consequent on the deregulation
introduced during the Qing dynasty.
20 On the travels of Si-tu Chos-kyi 'Byung-gnas in Yunnan, see also
Si-tu Chos-kyi rGya-mtsho, Pilgrimage to mDo-khams and Yunnan,
republished in gNas-yig phyogs-'grig, pp. 566-607, Sichuan
Nationalities Publishing House, 1998.
21 See D. Snellgrove, The Nine Ways of Bon, pp. 24–41.
22 On 'ju-thig cord divination, see Namkha'i Norbu, Drung, Dreu and
Bon, pp. 189–198.
23 For the traditional chronology attributed to Bon astrology, see
Namkha'i Norbu, op. cit., pp. 147-158.
24 White Beryl, f. 144b. See also Namkha'i Norbu, op. cit., pp. 158-161 for
other interpretations of this term.
25 For an appraisal of the astrological treatises of Dalai Lama v and Lu-
'go Bla-mkhyen Ngag-gi dBang-po, see D. Schuh, op. cit., p. 37 and
pp. 39–40.
26 'Blue beryl', or aquamarine, is regarded as a metaphor for the Buddha
of Medicine; 'white beryl as a metaphor for the crystal clarity of
predictions based on astrology and divination; and yellow beryla
metaphor for the dGe-lugs-pa school of Tibetan Buddhism. (A brief
summary of the astrological writings of Sangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho is
given in D. Schuh, op. cit., pp. 37–39.)
27 As indicated and illustrated in P. Cornu, Tibetan Astrology,
pp. 253–257, this widely used protective talisman, known as the seal
of sentient existence (srid-pa-ho'i phyag-rgya), symbolically depicts
the divination turtle, marked with the twelve animals, the eight
trigrams, and the nine numeric squares, along with the planets and
constellations.
28 The best colour illustrations of the Svarodaya Charts are to be found
in the extant 4-metre fifteenth-century scroll, on which see above,
note 16.
29 Dr Tshul-khrims rGyal-mtshan adds that although the formal
transmission has been broken, the meanings and understandings
conveyed by the White Beryl treatise remain intact, and continue to
be applied. For a brief appraisal of the astrological writings of
Dharmaśrī, see D. Schuh, op. cit., pp. 40–41.



403
Notes
30 The hierarch of Sa-skya may be known as the 'king of nāgas' (klu-
dbang), after 'Khon klu'i dbang po (fl. eighth century), the first
Buddhist master and translator of the 'Khon family, which
subsequently founded the monastery of Sa-skya during the eleventh
century. In this verse the learning of Sangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho, the
author of the White Beryl, is compared to the sacred waters of Lake
Anavatapta/Manasarovar in far-west Tibet, while his transmission
of elemental divination is compared to the Glang-chen kha-bab
source of the Brahmaputra, which flows from Mount Kailash in the
direction of Sa-skya. On these and other geographical locations in
Tibet, see G. Dorje, Tibet Handbook.
31 An annotation adds that 'khor-med (“uninterrupted') is an example of
a partial metaphor (Tib. cha-shas gzugs-can; Skt. avyavirūpaka)
according to the science of poetics.
32 The fact that ff. 37-58 were originally numbered ff. 35-56 may
suggest that the Thirty Chinese and Tibetan Computational Charts
(ff. 1-2) were originally inserted after the divination of death
(ff. 48-58) and before the Thirteen Charts of Bal-mo lding-skor
(f. 59), forming a logical sequence. If this were the case then the title
page and the folio immediately following it are no longer extant.
33 See below, p. 68.
34 The sDedge edition has recently been republished in modern format
by Krung-go'i bod-kyi shes-rig dpe-skrun-khang (2 vols), 1997.
35 See the biography of Dalai Lama v in nstb, Vol. 1, pp. 821-824.
36 See also Y. Parfianovich et al., Tibetan Medical Paintings, pp. 165–168
and pp. 321–324, where a distinction is made between ostensible
diseases which suddenly arise (ltar- snang 'phral), imaginary diseases
associated with demons (kun-btags gdon), absolute diseases which
harm the lifespan (yongs-grub tshe), and dependent diseases of past
karma (gzhan-dbang las).
37 Tibetan Astrology, p. 246.
38 For an account of Padmasambhava's activities in bringing demons
under an oath of allegiance, see Nsts, Vol. 1, pp. 512-521.
39 See Tibetan Medical Paintings, op. cit., pp. 107–108 and 263–264.
40 The spirit lords of the soil are discussed in detail below. For general
information on the other classes of spirit, see Nebesky-Wojkowitz,
Oracles and Demons of Tibet; also P. Cornu, Tibetan Astrology,
pp. 245–253.
41 See e.g. P. Cornu, Tibetan Astrology, pp. 40–46, and for a detailed
philosophical presentation, E. Napper, Dependent Arising and
Emptiness.
42 On the talismanic seal known as srid-pa-ho (srid-pa-ho'i phyag-rgya),
see above, note 27.
43 On such rites in general, see Nebesky-Wojkowitz, Oracles and
Demons of Tibet, pp. 343–397; also P. Cornu, Tibetan Astrology,
pp. 94-101; and Glossary, below.
7 From the Chinese perspective, the eight trigrams are said to be
combinations of Yin (the shady side of a hill), representing feminine
passivity, and Yang (the sunny side of a hill), representing masculine
activity. These are respectively symbolised by a broken line (--) and
an unbroken line (-). The distinctions between the Chinese system,
attributed to King Wan, and the Tibetan system, are discussed in
P. Cornu, Tibetan Astrology, pp. 107-111.
8 The history of the development of the twelve animals in China
suggests that there were originally only four: the dragon, the bird,
the tiger and the turtle corresponding respectively to spring,
summer, autumn and winter, or to east, south, west and north. Later
the number was gradually increased to six, eight and eventually
twelve. See Lois de Saussure, 'Le Cycle des douze animaux', in
Journal Asiatique, Jan/March 1920. It also appears that the twelve-
year cycle was originally represented as a system of twelve branches,
before the assimilation of the twelve animal signs (see P. Cornu,
Tibetan Astrology, p. 63).
9 The six emanational sages (sprul-sku thub-drug) are the most
important aspects of the Buddha-body of Emanation (nirmānakāya),
in contrast to Samantabhadra and Samantabhadrī, who embody the
Buddha-body of Reality (dharmakāya), and the thirty-six peaceful
buddhas and bodhisattvas, who embody the Buddha-body of Perfect
Resource (sambhogakäya). On the six emanational sages, see
Glossary.
10 Ch. Shi qin or Tian qin. Unidentified.
11 These are traditional Indian measurements. The yojana, each of
which contains 4 kroșa (earshot ranges), corresponds approximately
to 9 miles.
12 From the perspective of pure vision or sacred outlook (dag-snang),
each of the five peaks of Wu Tai Shan is viewed as the pure abode of
one of the five principal peaceful buddhas of the Buddha-body of
Perfect Resource (sambhogakāya), which comprises the luminous,
immaterial and unimpeded reflection-like forms of the pure energy of
enlightened mind, exemplified by the assemblage of the Peaceful and
Wrathful Deities. Among these five buddhas, Vairocana represents
the natural purity of the aggregate of consciousness, Aksobhya
represents the natural purity of the aggregate of form,
Ratnasambhava represents the natural purity of the aggregate of
sensation, Amitābha represents the natural purity of the aggregate
of perception, and Amoghasiddhi represents the natural purity of the
aggregate of motivational factors or tendencies. See G. Dorje and
G.Coleman, The Complete Tibetan Book of the Dead, Ch. 5, where the
symbolism and iconography of these buddhas are presented.
13 The li is a traditional Chinese measurement, equivalent to
approximately one-third of a mile (0.5 km).
14 Past action' (karma; Tib. las) refers to the doctrine of evolutionary
actions and their consequences. It includes in its causal aspect both
the actual actions (physical, verbal and mental) and the
psychological imprints and tendencies created within the mind by
such actions. See Glossary.
15 Presumably a-khro is the transliteration of an archaic Chinese name
for a yellow gemstone, similar to amber.
16 According to Dr Tshul-khrims rGyal-mtshan, this grass is identified
with the medicinal herb rtsa kun-bzang, which is said to have some
importance for the treatment of cancer.
17 These eight qualities of pure water are identified as: coolness,
sweetness, lightness, softness, clearness, soothingness, pleasantness
and wholesomeness.
18 A hybrid creature with the torso of a human and the wings and legs
of a bird.
19 For a modern account of this sacred site of Chinese Buddhism, see
Zhong Xin and Wei Lingwen, Wutaishan, Cultural Relics Publishing
House, 1984; and for a detailed account in Tibetan language which
combines both classical and contemporary sources, see ICang-kya
rol-pa'i rdo-rje, Zhing-mchog ri-bo rtse-lnga'i gnas-bshad, Qinghai
Nationalities Publishing House (1993). Vol. 1, pp. 575 ff. The
traditional Tibetan description is also presented by Nor-brang
O-rgyan in Bod-kyi rtsis-rig kun-'dus chen-mo., Vol. 1, pp. 575-647.
20 On these five types of stūpa, which are included among the eight
stūpas representative of the deeds of the Buddha, see for instance
K. Dowman, The Sacred Life of Tibet, pp. 228-233. Among them, the
stūpa symbolising the Buddha's enlightenment (byang-chub mchod-
rten) has simple steps indicative of the ten bodhisattva levels, the
five bodhisattva paths, and the eighteen distinct attributes of the
buddhas. The bkra-shis sgo-mang stūpa, symbolising the first
teaching of Buddhism, has terraced steps with gates or niches on
each side, representing the four truths, the eight aspects of
liberation, and the three approaches to the doctrine. The cho-'phrul
stūpa, symbolising the Buddha's performance of miracles at Śrāvasti,
has four simple terraced steps, one on each of its four sides. The
nirvāņa stūpa (myang-'das mchod-rten), symbolising the death of the
Buddha, has a bell-shaped dome, without steps, on a base
representing the ten virtuous actions. Lastly, the lha-babs mchod-rten
stūpa, which symbolises the descent of the Buddha from Tusita
where he had gone to instruct his late mother, has a staircase
running down each of its four sides. For information on the
development of the stūpa in general, refer to A. Snodgrass, The
Symbolism of the Stūpa.
21 These are explained below in detail, pp. 112-114.
22 The Cittamātra school propounds a phenomenalistic view of the
world, claiming descent from Asanga, the fourth-century Indian
master. Its main tenet is that all phenomena are either actual mental
events or extensions of the mind since objects are not directly
perceived, their substance being covert. In addition, the school
propounds that there exists no atomically composed material world
external to, or independent of, our perceptions, while consciousness
itself is considered to be eightfold, in that the six types of sensory
and mental consciousness which give rise to the perceptions of cyclic
existence are grounded in the defiled mental consciousness
(klistamanovijñāna) and in the substratum consciousness
(ālayavijñāna), which acts as a fundamental repository of past
propensities (vāsanā). On Cittamātra in general, see P. Williams,
Mahāyāna Buddhism, pp. 77–95; and for the Nyingma perspective,
NSTB, Vol. 1. pp. 160-162. On the basic purity of the eight aggregates
of consciousness, see G. Dorje and G. Coleman, The Complete Tibetan
Book of the Dead, Ch. 5.
23 From the Chinese perspective, the legendary emperor Yu
(2206-2197 bc) is said to have had a vision of the patterns of the nine
numeric or magic squares (Ch. lo-shu) on the shell of a turtle,
emerging from the River Lo, in consequence of which he composed
the treatise entitled Great Rule. See W.K. Chu and W.A. Sherrill,
The Astrology of I Ching, pp. 7-15. The Chinese and Tibetan pictorial
representations are compared in P. Cornu, Tibetan Astrology, p. 103.
24 On the contrasting Indian mythological origin of the planets and
their symbolic representations, see P. Cornu, Tibetan Astrology,
pp. 143-145.
25 The twenty-eight lunar constellations are prominent in both the
Indian system, where they are known as naksatra, and in the Chinese
system, where they are known as siu. A common historical origin has
been posited. See P. Cornu, Tibetan Astrology, p. 24.
26 Abhidharma sources identify eighteen sensory or psychophysical
constituents (astadaśadhātu; Tib, khams bco-brgyad): those of the eye,
form and visual consciousness; those of the ear, sound and auditory
consciousness; those of the nose, smell and olfactory consciousness;
those of the tongue, taste and gustatory consciousness; those of the
body, touch and tactile consciousness; and those of the intellect,
phenomena and mental consciousness. For a detailed analysis see
L. Pruden (trans.), Abhidharmakośabhāsyam, Ch. 1, 'The Dhātus',
pp. 55–131. Similarly, there is an enumeration of twelve sensory
activity fields (dvādaśāyatana; Tib. skye-mched bcu-gnyis), six of which
are external and the remainder internal, divided into pairs as follows:
the activity field of the eye (cakşurāyatana) and the activity field of
form (rūpāyatana), the activity field of the ear (śrotrāyatana) and of
sound (śabdāyatana), the activity field of the nose (ghrāņāyatana) and
of smell (gandhāyatana), the activity field of the tongue (jihvāyatana)
and of taste (rasāyatana), the activity field of the body (kāyāyatana)
and of touch (sprastāyatana), and, lastly, the activity field of the
intellect (mana āyatana) and of mental objects (dharmāyatana). See
L. Pruden (trans.), Abhidharmakośabhāsyam, Ch. 1, 'The Dhātus’, 72 ff.
27 The distinctions between these elemental aspects are explained
below in detail, pp. 68–70. On the eight aggregates of consciousness,
see note 22.
28 For a synopsis of these attributes of the five elements, see below,
Part 11, pp. 62-63.
29 The father of Confucius is known by the name of Shu Liang-he.
Part 1
1 These elements of the Chinese tradition are considered to be
dynamic interactive energies, in contrast to the five elements of
Indian cosmology (earth, water, fire, air and space), which are
regarded as the building blocks of the material world. See P. Cornu,
Tibetan Astrology, pp. 52-53.
2 With reference to the three world-systems (tridhātu), it is said that
the world-system of desire (kāmadhātu) is specifically inhabited by
beings of all six classes, i.e. the three lower types subject to inferior
birth (the inhabitants of the hells [naraka], the tormented spirits
[preta] and animals (tiryak], who are respectively under the sway
of hatred, miserliness and delusion); and the three higher types
(namely: humans [manusya], antigods (asura] and gods [deva],
who are respectively under the sway of attachment, envy and pride).
See Glossary.
3 The term dharmadhātu refers to the emptiness (šūnyatā), free from
conceptual elaborations, which is the dimension of the Buddha-body
of Reality (dharmakāya; Tib. chos-sku), iconographically represented
by the primordial or atemporal buddha Samantabhadra. See
Glossary.
4 These god realms are all held to be incorporated within the world
system of desire. See Glossary, under Three World System.
5 For an enumeration of the snang-srid lha-srin sde-brgyad, see
Nebesky-Wojkowitz, Oracles and Demons of Tibet, pp. 254–256. The
ogres (srin-po) are a well-known class of carnivorous antigods or
demons, epitomised by the ten-headed Rāvana in ancient Indian
literature.
6 Beings who suffer within cyclic existence (samsāra) are held to be
obscured by the obscuration caused by dissonant mental states
(kleśāvaraņa) and the obscuration of knowledge (jñeyāvaraņa). See
Glossary.



404
The White Beryl
55 Tib. bshad-pa'i rus-sba. This refers to the appropriate textual
exegeses (in the view of Lo-chen), or it may be rendered as bshas-pa'i
rus-sbal, referring to the turtle of incision (in the view of Sangs-rgyas
rGya-mtsho). The latter refers to the horizontal penetration of the
turtle-shell by a sword or arrow, the hilt lying to the east (wood) and
the point to the west (iron), the top emitting fire (south) and the
bottom excreting urine/water (north). See above, p. 51.
30 The final nirvāṇa or demise of the historical Buddha is generally
dated to 483 Bc. Traditionally there have been over fifty diverse
dates given for the Buddha's final nirvāna, ranging from 2100 Bc to
265 bc. See A. Bareau, ‘La Date du Nirvāṇa', Journal Asiatique, 1953,
pp. 27-52. Confucius is generally dated 551-479 BC.
31 See above, Introduction, note 18. The literary background to the
Chinese system of divination is discussed in W.A. Sherill and
W.K. Chu, An Anthology of I Ching. For a detailed Tibetan account
of the historical development of Chinese divinatory traditions and
literature, see Dr Yumpa's article in Bod-kyi rtsis-rig kun-'dus chen-
mo, Vol. 1, pp. 548–574.
32 For an account of the distinction between these modes of
transmission within the rNying-ma school, see Nsts, Vol. 1, Pts 5-6.
The revelations or treasures (gter-ma) are generally those texts
hidden physically or mentally by Padmasambhava in Tibet, which
would be revealed, discovered or unearthed by their prophesied
discoverers in future generations, in contrast to the long continuous
historical transmission from master to student, which is known as
the oral transmission (bka'-ma).
33 For an account of the transmission of gter-ma, see nstb, Vol. 1,
pp. 741-880, and Tulku Thondup Rinpoche, Hidden Teachings of
Tibet.
34 On the activities of this treasure-finder (gter-ston), see also nsti, i
Vol. 1, pp. 713, 765.
35 On these last two figures who authored the Pad-dkar Zhal-lung, see
above, pp. 13-14.
36 See above, p. 14; also D. Schuh, op. cit., p. 85, who states that this
figure is also known as dPal-'byor Phun-tshogs.
37 According to the description in White Beryl, it was Dalai Lama v who
imparted the Zur lineage of Chos-dbyings Rang-grol to its author
Sangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho. White Beryl specifically mentions Dalai
Lama v under the epithets srid-zhi'i gtsug-rgyan dam-pa and lha-gcig
skyabs-mgon chen-po. However, our manuscript appears once again to
depict Zur Chos-dbyings rang-grol, already depicted above (84),
here under the epithet bstan-pa'i bdag-po thams-cad mkhyen-pa.
38 See above, p. 14.
39 See above, p. 15.
40 The introductory verses of the manuscript refer directly to the
resources and wealth of its Sa-skya-pa patrons.
41 Information on these Sa-skya hierarchs has kindly been provided by
Dr David Jackson.
42 This refers to gTer-bdag gling-pa, the founder of sMin-grol-gling,
on whom see NSTB, Vol. 1, pp. 825-834.
43 The attributes of knowledge, love and power (mkhyen-brtse-nus gsum)
are illustrated in this verse. Mañjuśrīkumārabhūta is
iconographically depicted as a bodhisattva prince of the eighth level.
44 The attributes of buddha-mind, buddha-speech and buddha-body
(thugs, gsung and sku'i yon-tan) are all illustrated by this verse.
45 On the sixteen saints who requested, emanated, received and
maintained the teaching of elemental divination in China, see above,
pp. 54–55. There are, however, variant listings of the last four who
maintained the teaching, on which see Zhus-chen Tshul-khrims Rin-
chen’s bs Tan'-'gyur dKar-chag.
46 This refers to the lineage holders of the Phug-pa school maintained
by Lo-chen Dharmaśrī and Sangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho.
47 The elder brother of Lo-chen Dharmaśrī.
48 He was an aristocrat and teacher of Dalai Lama v.
49 Lo-chen Dharmaśrī's Tibetan teacher of 'byung-rtsis.
50 The five principal tantras of divination science (gtsug-lag-gi rgyud
Inga) are enumerated as follows: sDong-po dgu-'dus shing-gi rgyud,
sNang-srid sgron-me me'i rgyud, Rin-chen kun-'dus sa'i rgyud, Ba-la
patra lcags-kyi rgyud and bDud-rtsi'i bum-pa chu'i rgyud. See the list
given above, p. 51.
51 Tib, rang-bzhin gnas-pa'i rus-sbal, identified with emptiness (stong-
pa-nyid).
52 Tib. chags-pa'i rus-sbal, identified with the container world or
physical environment (snod).
53 Tib. srid-pa'i rus-sbal, identified with the sentient contents (bcud) of
the container world.
54 Tib. sprul-pa'i rus-sbal, which is the symbolic divination chart
emanated by Mañjughoșa.
Part II
1 P. Cornu, Tibetan Astrology, p. 55, additionally points out that wood
predominates in spring, fire in summer, iron in autumn, and water in
winter, while earth does so in the transitional or intermediate phases
between these four seasons.
2 The subjects or individuals, who are the object of divination (rtsi-
bya), are considered in terms of the five elements, and the application
(rtsis-thabs) comprises the analyses of the four ‘mother-son
enemy-friend' (ma-bu dgra-grogs) relationships.
3 See also P. Cornu, Tibetan Astrology, pp. 56-59, for a clear
presentation of the five elements and their characteristics.
4 P. Cornu, Tibetan Astrology, p. 61, presents these relationships in
tabular form.
5 There are different sequences for calculating the mother-son,
enemy-friend, and identity-relationships between the elements.
These are known as the backward numeric sequence for calculating
mother-relationships (yar-'ded ma); the forward numeric sequence
for calculating son-relationships (mar-'ded bu); the alternating or
leapfrogging backward numeric sequence for calculating enemy-
relationships, also known as the 'grandmother counting method
(yar-'ded dgra); and the alternating or leapfrogging forward numeric
sequence for calculating friend-relationships, also known as the
‘grandchild counting method' (mar-'ded grogs). When the fingers of
the hand are used to make these calculations, the thumb represents
wood, the little finger represents water, the fourth finger represents
iron, the middle finger represents earth, and the index finger
represents fire.
6 i.e. in divinations based on the twelve animal signs, the eight
trigrams, the nine numeric squares, the eight planets and twenty-
eight constellations.
7 Space and air may also be subsumed within wood, and mountain
within earth.
8 There are 360 primordial bewitchers (ye-'brog), corresponding to the
360 days of the lunar year. These deities of the lunar days' (tshes-kyi
lha sum-brgya drug-cu) are said to be naturally supported on the seed-
syllables of the meditational deities within the body, fully manifest
in the case of pure beings but, in the case of obscured beings,
assuming the guise of the 360 primordial bewitchers. See
Y. Parfianovich et al., Tibetan Medical Paintings, Vol. 1, p. 89.
9 These four adversaries (gshed-bzhi) refer to the four adversarial
tomb-signs (dur-mig bzhi) on which see below, p. 117.
10 Tib. rnam-rtog; Skt. vikalpa.
11 i.e. as conditions (rkyen) rather than primary causes (rgyu).
12 In White Beryl, both the forms gab-rtse and gab-tshe are given. 'Gab’
is defined as “obscure topics comprising past actions, merits, vitality
and body elements (las-dang bsod-nams srog-lus gab); and ‘rtse' as the
‘sharpness of their point of realisation' (de-dag rtogs-pa'i rtse-yi
nongs). Alternatively, ‘gab' is defined as “an example of the esoteric
instructions' (man-ngag dpe-la gab-pa), or ‘an example of sharp
vision' (rno-mthong dpe-la gab-pa), and ‘tshe' as the lifespan
measured on the basis of the natal horoscope' (tshe-rabs las-kyi rtsis-
byas-nas tshe-yi ring-thung brtsi-bas tshe).
13 On this distinction between the natural basis (rang-bzhin gzhi) or
emptiness (stong-pa-nyid), and the bewildering appearances ('khrul-
snang) of phenomenal existence, see Dudjom Rinpoche, nstb, Vol. 1,
pp. 53–55.
14 White Beryl, f. 155b, adds that for this reason, the objects and
practices of this divination are naturally present and inexpressible,
being of the nature of space.
15 Tib. ma-rig-pa; Skt. avidyā. On the nature of fundamental ignorance
and the arising of bewildering appearances from it, see Glossary
16 Tib. rtsis-gzhi and rtsis-thabs.
17 These classifications of the discrete elements are delineated in
tabular format on Plate 1. White Beryl states (f. 155b) that space
permeates all the five external elements (phyi 'byung lnga), and that
upon it in succession emerge wood/air, water, earth and fire. As to
the correspondence between the external, internal and secret
elements, at the time of conception in the womb: wood internally
forms the nerves and blood vessels, water forms the blood and serum,
iron forms the bones, earth forms the flesh, and fire forms the
metabolism. Secretly, the external elements are also inherent in the
channels of the solid viscera. Thus, wood is inherent in the channels
of the liver, water in those of the kidneys, iron in those of the lungs,
earth in those of the spleen, and fire in those of the heart. The hollow
viscera are also related to these in the following manner: the gall
bladder to the liver, the small intestine to the heart, the large
intestine to the lungs, the stomach to the spleen, and the urinary
bladder to the kidneys.
18 Tib. shes-bya. Note that Moonbeams here reads shes-pa, but see White
Beryl, f. 156. These apparent objects are the objects of the divination,
including number, colour, form, state of health and so forth.
19 i.e. in terms of mother-son and enemy-friend relationships.
20 See above, p. 62.
21 The last two rows, not actually depicted on the Plate, have been
added in accordance with the authoritative model charts illustrated
in White Beryl.
22 The year of greater penalty (chad-chen) is equivalent to the tomb-
sign year (dur).
23 The year of lesser penalty (chad-chung) is equivalent to the bdun-zur
year.
24 For a description of all these aspects formed by their relationship
with the cycle of years, see the chart on Plate 1 opposite.
25 For an analysis of this twelve-year cycle from the standpoint of natal
horoscope, see below, pp. 145–147.
26 On the geomantic calculations pertaining to the spirit lord of the
soil, The-se, see below, Part II, p. 122. On the time of Mañjughoşa's
emanation, see above, pp. 48–49.
27 For an analysis of this sexagenary cycle from the standpoint of natal
horoscope, see below, pp. 147-154; and for a illustrated summary of
the attributes or aspects of each of the sixty years, see Plates 3-8 and
16–22.
28 See P. Cornu, Tibetan Astrology, p. 23.
29 For a complete list of the names of the sixty years according to
the Tantra of the Wheel of Time, see also D. Schuh, Untersuchungen
zur Geschichte der tibetischen Kalenderrechnung, pp. 144-145; and
P. Cornu, Tibetan Astrology, pp. 80–81.
30 It is important to remember that the Tibetan lunar year will usually
commence in February or March of the corresponding Western year,
according to the calculations of the Phug-pa school, so that there is
invariably an overlap of two or three months.
31 Male years are considered harsh, and female years gentle.
32 The animal signs are depicted in these sectors on Plate 2. See above,
p. 66.
33 The latter series includes three successive sexagenary cycles making
a total of 180 years, since each cycle is differentiated according to the
vitality numeric square (Srog-sme), the destiny numeric square
(dbang-sme) and body numeric square (lus-sme) corresponding to each
year. On Plates 3–8 all three numeric squares are combined within a
single cycle.
34 P. Cornu in Tibetan Astrology, pp. 90-91, offers a useful chart of these
four elemental aspects for each year of the sexagenary cycle in
tabular form.
35 The life-spirit (bla) moves up and down through the left side of a
male's body and the right side of a female's according to a monthly
cycle. This motion commences from the soles of the feet at the new
moon, and reaches the crown of the head at full moon. On this cycle
and the roaming of the life-spirit, see Tibetan Medical Paintings,
op. cit., pp. 39–40, 195–196. The rituals for summoning or recalling
the life-spirit (bla-'gugs) in order to restore health or capture the life-
supporting talisman (bla-gnas) of another are frequently mentioned
among the recommended courses of action in treatises such as the
White Beryl. On the concept of the 'life-supporting talisman', see
NSTB, pp. 605, 790.
36 The second row of this chart has been added to facilitate
comprehension.
37 For the technique of counting in trigrams, see below, pp. 106-108.



405
Notes
38 There is a mnemonic verse, taught by Dr Tshul-khrims rGyal-
mtshan, which facilitates this identification of the element of the
body (lus-kyi khams):
Iron is [the body element] for the wood mouse, ox, horse and
sheep (shing-gi byi-glang-rta-lug lcags),
Iron is (the body element] for the water tiger, hare, bird and
monkey (chu-yi stag-yos-bya-spre lcags),
Iron is [the body element] for iron dog, pig, dragon and snake
(lcags-kyi khyi-phag-'brug-sbrul lcags),
Iron is the body element for these twelve (bcu-gnyis-po-yi lus
de lcags).
Then, starting from the destiny (element] (de-nas dbang-thang
ni brtsams-te),
The body element with which it has a mother-relationship is
wood, and the one with which it has a son-relationship is
water (ma-lus shing-la bu-lus chu),
The body element with which it has an enemy-relationship is
earth, and the one with which it has a friend-relationship is
fire (dgra-lus sa-la 'grogs-lus me).
For example, since water is the mother of wood (dper-na shing-
ma chu yin-bas),
Wood is the body element for those of the water mouse, water
ox, water horse and water sheep (chu-byi chu-glang chu-rta
chu-lug rnams-kyi lus shing yin).
Since fire is the son of wood (shing-bu me yin-bas),
Water is the body element for those of the fire mouse, fire ox,
fire horse and fire sheep (me-byi me-glang me-rta me-lug
rnams-kyi lus chu yin).
Since iron is the enemy of wood (shing-gi dgra lcags yin-bas),
Earth is the body element for those of the iron mouse, iron ox,
iron horse and iron sheep (lcags-byi lcags-glang lcags-rta
lcags-lug rnams-kyi lus sa yin).
Since earth is the friend of wood (shing-gi 'grogs sa yin-bas),
Fire is the body element for those of the earth mouse, earth ox,
earth horse and earth sheep (sa-byi sa-glang sa-rta sa-lug
rnams-kyi lus me yin).
This (sequence] should be applied to the other Cyears] (des
gzhan-la dgre dgos-kyi red).
39 For a complete listing of the correspondences between the elemental
aspects of the sexagenary cycle in tabular format, see White Beryl,
ff. 71a-74b, also below, pp. 70–85 and Plates 3–8 and 16-22. The
body element is determined by the sector in which the destiny
element is found, though the method of calculation, as indicated in
the previous note, is distinct and highly complicated.
40 kha-srog is an archaic Chinese expression in Tibetan transliteration.
On these pairings of the body elements, and their pictorial
representations, see below, Plates 3–8 and 16-22; also White Beryl,
f. 156a/b.
41 Age one here includes 1, 11, 21, 31, 41, 51, 61, 71, 81, 91 etc.; while
age ten includes 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90 etc.
42 Age two here includes 2, 22, 32, 42, 52, 62, 72, 82, 92 etc.; while age
three includes 3, 13, 23, 33, 43, 53, 63, 73, 83, 93 etc.
43 Age four here includes 4, 14, 24, 34, 44, 54, 64, 74, 84, 94 etc; while
age five includes 5, 15, 25, 35, 45, 55, 65, 75, 85, 95, etc.
44 Age six here includes 6, 16, 26, 36, 46, 56, 66, 76, 86, 96 etc.; while
age seven includes 7, 17, 27, 37, 47, 57, 67, 77, 87, 97, etc.
45 Age eight here includes 8, 18, 28, 38, 48, 58, 68, 78, 88, 98 etc.; while
age nine includes 9, 19, 29, 39, 49, 59, 69, 79, 89, 99 etc.
46 Tib. bu-'ded sum-cu. The destiny elements corresponding to the sixty
years or thirty pairs of consecutive numbers are computed in the
sequence: wood, fire, earth, iron, water, starting from the wood
mouse and ending with the water pig.
47 The authentic spelling klung-rta, which is found in White Beryl,
derives from Chinese sources, according to Mi-pham Rin-po-che, but
has often been rendered as rlung-rta ('wind-horse') in Tibetan. Luck
is ritually sustained by the hoisting of an inscribed prayer-flag, for
a description of which see P. Cornu, Tibetan Astrology, pp. 97–101.
48 For a complete listing of these numbers indicative of vitality, see
below, Plates 3–8.
49 Some sources read me for med, suggesting that the luck-aspect of the
earth element is fire.
50 These natal numeric squares are enumerated according to the
sexagenary cycle on Plates 3–8 and 16-18.
51 Generally, the body element should be symbolised by the colour of
the turban worn by the sixty animals.
52 On Plates 3-8, fig. 2, and 16-22, fig. 1, the colour of the animal's belt,
which is indicative of the luck element, has sometimes been
mistakenly depicted by the artists or their apprentices. Hence, in the
case of the wood mouse year, the plate mistakenly depicts the belt as
white instead of green.
53 The plate mistakenly depicts this belt as red instead of white.
54 The plate mistakenly depicts this belt as yellow instead of white.
55 The plate mistakenly depicts this belt as yellow instead of red.
56 The plate mistakenly depicts this belt as yellow instead of white.
57 The painting depicts this belt as yellow instead of green.
58 The plate mistakenly depicts White 8 instead of White 6.
59 On these terms, see notes. 96–97 below.
60 An alternative reading, ru-chod lnga, suggests the equally
inauspicious appearance of a deer with its antlers sheared off.
61 In the case of one born in the iron tiger year (1950), this coincided in
1997 with the wood monkey year, counting five backwards from the
present log-men, i.e. earth ox.
62 Tib. bu-'ded.
63 Tib. bu-tsha ma-mad.
64 Tib. gnyan-lam mtha'-bzhi. This term includes elder brothers (gcen-
po), elder sisters (gcen-mo), younger brothers (gcung-po) and younger
sisters (gcung-mo).
65 Some sources read nang-dgra.
66 On the origin of the bdun-zur aspect, in particular, see White Beryl,
f. 142b.
67 See below, Plate 6, where this missing line is supplied.
68 Tib. 'byung-ba lnga-ldan. This suggests that each of the five elements
is fully present in the five aspects of vitality, body, destiny, luck and
constitutional type. It is an important consideration for divination
concerning marriage (bag-rtsis). See below, Part v. On the
significance of the three rows of numeric squares, see below,
pp. 96-101.
69 Tib. "byung-ba gnyis-ldan. In this case only two of the five elements
are distinctly present in the aforementioned five aspects.
70 The term zla-ba, rendered in translation as ‘month', is said to imply
the ‘completion of the cycle of sixty auspicious coincidences' (rten-
'brel 'khor-lo drug-cur rdzogs) within each of the twelve lunar
mansions of the year. See White Beryl, f. 142b. The twelve months are
also said to be derived from the divination turtle's twelve sectors of
growth and decline (dar-gud bcu-gnyis), starting from the tiger
month and ending with the ox month. See White Beryl, f. 157a.
71 Tables coordinating these different systems are also provided in
D. Schuh, Untersuchungen zur Geschichte der tibetischen
Kalenderrechnung, p. 146; and P. Cornu, Tibetan Astrology, p. 171.
72 This follows the phug-lugs system of calendrical reckoning
established by Phug-pa Lhub-grub rGya-mtsho. White Beryl, f. 157a,
adds that the tiger is placed first because the element of its
constitutional type (wood) is in a son-relationship with the
constitutional type (water) of the first year sign (mouse). On the
correspondences between the Indian-based enumerations of the
lunar months and the animals-signs, see also D. Schuh,
Untersuchungen zur Geschichte der tibetischen Kalenderrechnung, p. 146.
73 On the Sanskrit names of the constellations and months, see below,
p. 114.
74 On the application of these categories of odd, even and irregular
numbers, particularly in the context of natal horoscope, see also
below, pp. 172-174.
75 For a chart indicating these mid-periods of the months of the year,
see R.H. Matthews, Chinese-English Dictionary, Appendix.
76 An intercalary month (zla-bshol) is inserted on average once every
thirty months to compensate for the short-fall between the duration
of the lunar year (354 solar days) as opposed to the solar year (365.25
solar days).
77 These phases correspond to the solar calendar and are known in
succession as: Advent of Spring, Rain Water, Excited Insects, Vernal
Equinox, Clear and Bright, Grain Rains, Advent of Summer, Filling
of Grain, Ears of Grain, Summer Solstice, Slight Heat, Great Heat,
Advent of Autumn, Limit of Heat, White Dew, Autumn Equinox,
Cold Dew, Descent of Hoar Frost, Advent of Winter, Little Snow,
Heavy Snow, Winter Solstice, Little Cold and Severe Cold. See the
chart in W.K. Chu and W.A. Sherrill, The Astrology of I Ching,
pp. 21-25. For the Tibetan equivalents, see the chart indicating the
correspondences between the twenty-four seasonal phases in brDa'-
yig gsar-khrid, p. 887.
78 Tib. zla-bshol med. This term indicates that there is no intercalary
month or residue present. White Beryl adds (f. 157a) that the date of
the winter solstice ends with Saturn and that of the summer solstice
with Mars.
79 White Beryl, f. 157a, remarks that the calendar dates of the lunar
month derive from the 180 outer and inner conceptual thoughts of
the divination turtle (rus-sbal phyi-nang rtog-pa brgya-dang brgyad-
cu). Elsewhere, f. 143a, the term zhag, also meaning day or twenty-
four hour period, is said to be etymologically derived by phonetic
association with the term chags ('attachment'), indicating that the
male daytime phases are 'attached to the female night-time phases,
and vice versa.
80 Full moon occurs on the fifteenth day of the lunar month, and no-
moon on the thirtieth. A table indicating the animals and elements
corresponding to the calendar dates is given in P. Cornu, Tibetan
Astrology, pp. 188-189. Also, for detailed tables which enable the
reader to determine a precise Western date in terms of four different
Tibetan calendrical systems, see D. Schuh, Untersuchungen zur
Geschichte der tibetischen Kalenderrechnung, Part Two; and for a more
simplified version, covering the period 1880-1997, see P. Cornu,
Tibetan Astrology, pp. 157–170.
81 On these two-hour periods (dus-tshod), see below.
82 According to White Beryl, f. 143a, the term dus-tshod (ʻtwo-hour
period') is etymologically derived from the expressions ‘dus-gcod
(temporal division), and 'tshod-'dzin' (measurement). Elsewhere, the
hours are said to derive from the divination turtle's 720 cultivations
of enlightened attitude (sems-bskyed bdun-brgya nyi-shu).
83 See also P. Cornu, Tibetan Astrology, p. 213.
84 White Beryl, f. 157a, provides the example of the fire hare year and the
first and middle spring months, which have the destiny element
earth, since 'earth is the son of fire'; followed by the last spring and
first summer months, which have the destiny element iron, and so on,
counting consecutively.
85 White Beryl, f. 157a/b, gives the example of the first spring or tiger
month with a destiny element earth, and the first calendar or tiger
day, which has the destiny element iron, since ‘iron is the son of
earth', and the second calendar day being the water hare, and so on,
counting consecutively. Thus, 'the first and the sixth have an
identity-relationship, the second and the seventh have a son-
relationship, the third and the eighth have a friend-relationship, the
fourth and the ninth have an enemy-relationship, while the fifth and
the tenth have a mother-relationship'.
86 White Beryl, f. 157b, gives the example of the first calendar date, that
of the tiger, with an iron destiny element, and the daybreak hour
being that of the water hare, since 'water is the son of iron', and the
sunrise hour being that of the wood dragon, and so on, counting
consecutively.
87 See P. Cornu, Tibetan Astrology, pp. 171-173; and especially the table
of monthly destiny elements on p. 173.
88 See also the table of daily destiny elements in P. Cornu, Tibetan
Astrology, pp. 188-189.
89 See also P. Cornu, Tibetan Astrology, pp. 214–215.
90 See above, pp. 68-69.
91 The term sme-ba is etymologically derived from the expressions ‘dirt
excreted from the nine orifices' (bu-ga-dgu-las dme byas-pa'i dme-ba);
‘mottled moles on the body' (lus-la khra-mo sme-ba); and ‘indelible
mark' (mi-zad rme-ba), for which reason three different spellings are
found. The nine numeric squares (sme-ba dgu) are said to have
emerged from the nine orifices of the divination turtle. See White
Beryl, f. 157b. The Chinese origins of this technique have already
been mentioned; see above, Part 1, note 23.
92 Or lha-sman.
93 On all these classes of spirits, see Glossary.
94 Like the trigram charts, each of these also contains peripheral
illustrations suggestive of the diverse results of the divinations.
95 White Beryl, f. 157b, adds that Black Two is held to be blackest of all
and Blue Three to be slightly black'.
96 Tib. gnam-sgo, through which beings are exposed to avalanches,
lightning bolts, stroke and epilepsy and which can be remedied by
ritual thread-crosses such as the nam-mkha'. See Nebesky-
Wojkowitz, Oracles and Demons of Tibet, pp. 369-397.
97 Tib. sa-sgo, through which beings are susceptible to the demonic
influence of nāgas and spirit lords of the soil (bhūmipati), as well as
lameness, etc. These can be remedied by the application of the lug-
mgo cho-ga. See Nebesky-Wojkowitz, Oracles and Demons of Tibet,
pp. 285–298.
98 See Namkhai Norbu, Drung, Dreu and Bon; and P. Cornu, Tibetan
Astrology, pp. 128-129 (chart). On the origins of this system, see
W.K. Chu and W.A. Sherill, The Astrology of I Ching, pp. 16-20.
99 This is the natal or body numeric square of the wood pig year (shing
dbyi-lo), in which the texts of elemental divination were first
expounded. See Plate 16.



406
The White Beryl
100 This is the natal or body numeric square of the water pig year. See
Plate 18; also White Beryl, f. 74b.
101 This is the vitality numeric square of the wood mouse year. See Plate
19; also White Beryl, f. 74b.
102 This is the vitality numeric square of the water pig year. See Plate
21; also White Beryl, f. 74b.
103 This is the destiny numeric square of the wood mouse year. See Plate
21; also White Beryl, f. 74b.
104 This is the destiny numeric square of the water pig year. See Plate
22; also White Beryl, f. 74b.
105 See above, p. 69, where the luck aspects are shown to be identical for
the first group comprising horse, tiger and dog years; the second
group comprising pig, sheep and hare years; the third group
comprising bird, ox and snake years; and the fourth group
comprising mouse, dragon and monkey years.
106 i.e. the year in which Lo-chen composed Moonbeams.
107 The wood tiger is the luck aspect for those born in a mouse year. See
above, p. 69. The vitality number of the wood tiger sign is White
Eight. See Plate 7; also the chart in White Beryl, f. 74b.
108 The belt in this image should be green but is depicted as white.
109 The belt in this image should be white but is depicted as red.
110 The belt in this image should be red but is depicted as white.
111 The belt in this image should be red but is depicted as white.
112 The belt in this image should be red but is depicted as white.
113 The belt in this image should be red but is depicted as white.
114 The belt in this image should be green but is depicted as blue.
115 The painting depicts a wood pig rather than the earth pig.
116 The belt in this image is depicted as blue instead of green.
117 The belt in this image is depicted as blue instead of red.
118 The belt in this image is depicted as white instead of red.
119 The belt in this image is depicted as white instead of green.
120 The belt in this image is depicted as white instead of red.
121 The painting depicts an earth dog instead of a wood dog.
122 The belt in this image is depicted as white instead of green.
123 The belt in this image is depicted as white instead of red.
124 The belt in this image is depicted as white instead of green.
125 The belt in this image is depicted as white instead of red.
126 The belt in this image is depicted as white instead of blue.
127 The belt in this image is depicted as white instead of green.
128 The belt in this image is depicted as white instead of red.
129 The painting depicts a wood pig instead of an earth pig.
130 The painting depicts a wood tiger instead of an earth tiger, and the
belt is depicted as white instead of green.
131 The belt in this image is depicted as blue instead of green.
132 The belt in this image is depicted as white instead of blue.
133 The belt in this image is depicted as white instead of red.
134 The belt in this image is depicted as white instead of blue.
135 The painting depicts an iron monkey instead of a fire monkey.
136 The belt in this image is depicted as white instead of red.
137 The belt in this image is depicted as white instead of green.
138 The belt in this image is depicted as white instead of blue.
139 The belt in this image is depicted as white instead of green.
140 The belt in this image is depicted as white instead of red.
141 The painting depicts an iron bird instead of a water bird.
142 The belt in this image is depicted as white instead of green.
143 The belt in this image is depicted as white instead of blue.
144 The belt in this image is depicted as white instead of green.
145 The painting depicts an iron snake instead of an earth snake.
146 The belt in this image is depicted as white instead of green.
147 The belt in this image is depicted as white instead of blue.
148 The belt in this image is depicted as white instead of red.
149 The belt in this image is depicted as white instead of green
150 The belt in this image is depicted as white instead of blue.
151 The painting depicts an iron tiger instead of a fire tiger.
152 The belt in this image is depicted as white instead of blue.
153 The belt in this image is depicted as white instead of red.
154 The belt in this image is depicted as white instead of green.
155 The belt in this image is depicted as white instead of blue.
156 The belt in this image is depicted as white instead of red.
157 The painting depicts a wood pig rather than an earth pig.
158 The belt in this image has faded and appears white instead of red.
159 The painting depicts a wood tiger rather than an earth tiger, and the
belt is depicted as white instead of green.
160 The belt in this image is depicted as white instead of blue.
161 The belt in this image is depicted as white instead of red.
162 The belt in this image is depicted as blue instead of green.
163 The painting depicts an iron dog rather than a fire dog.
164 The belt in this image is depicted as white instead of red.
165 The belt in this image is depicted as white instead of red.
166 The belt in this image is depicted as white instead of red.
167 See the layout of these nine charts on Plate 2.
168 White Beryl, f. 158a, refers to this method of calculation in which the
number of the present year is fixed at the centre as the rgya-skor.
169 See above, pp. 70–85.
170 See the helpful diagrams in P. Cornu, Tibetan Astrology, p. 119 and
the chart on p. 122.
171 White Beryl, f. 158a, remarks that this mode of calculation is known
as lte-skor, in which the natal numeric square is placed in the centre.
172 See the chart above, Plate 1, p. 88. White Beryl, f.158a, adds that
Black Two, Yellow Five and White Eight are the natal numeric
squares (skyes-sme) corresponding to the four first seasonal months;
White One, Green Four and Red Seven to the four middle seasonal
months; and Blue Three, White Six and Red Nine to the four last
seasonal months.
173 See also P. Cornu, Tibetan Astrology, p. 193.
174 Tib. ra-ru ("goat-horns') indicates even numbers, pairs, or plurality;
while bse-ru (ʻrhino-horns') indicates odd numbers and paucity. For
the application of these terms in natal horoscope, see below, pp.
172-174.
175 See the above chart, p. 103, which illustrates the correspondence
between the nine numeric squares and the nine age categories, to one
of which the subject will belong.
176 i.e. the row representing the natal or body numeric square (skye-sme).
177 The term spar-kha (“trigram') is defined in White Beryl, f. 141a, as
'blazing in the heavens and divided into eight sectors ‘(gnam-du sbar-
ba-dang kha-brgyad-du gyes spar-kha zhes). Accordingly, the trigrams
are said to have ‘blazed with anger following the birth of the two
incestuous offspring, Kham (water) and Zin (wood), and to have
separated into their eight distinct sectors in order to restore social
harmony. In terms of the divination turtle, the eight trigrams are
derived from its eight aggregates or classes of consciousness (rnam-
shes tshogs-brgyad). See White Beryl, f. 158b. On the Chinese origins of
the trigrams, see Introduction, note 17.
178 Tib. gnam-sman, which is symbolised in the spar-kha by a circle or
circular mirror. White Beryl, f. 158b, comments that these are
auspicious and the best of the best relationships because space looks
down on earth, iron digs earth, air shakes wood, and fire boils water.
179 Tib. srog-'tsho gnas-pa, which is symbolised in the spar-kha by a vajra.
White Beryl, f. 158b, comments that these are auspicious and the
mediocre class of best relationships because wood sustains the
vitality of fire, mountain that of earth, air that of water, and iron is
obtained from space (i.e. meteorites).
180 Tib. dpal-bskyed, which is symbolised in the spar-kha by a heart-orb
(śrīvatsa). White Beryl, f. 158b, comments that these are auspicious
and the worst class of best relationships because air grows through
the glory of fire, earth through the glory of iron, mountains through
the glory of space, and water through the glory of wood.
181 Tib. phyva-lon, identified with grang-'gug, which is symbolised in the
spar-kha by a svāstika. White Beryl, f. 158b, comments that these are
auspicious and the best class of mediocre relationships because iron
attracts fire, and mountains attract space.
182 Tib. phyva-gYang, which is symbolised in the spar-kha by another
svāstika. White Beryl, f. 158b, comments that these are auspicious and
the mediocre class of mediocre relationships because earth and
water, and wood and air, have a mutually balanced or neutral luck.
183 Tib. gnod-pa, which is symbolised in the spar-kha by a black triangle.
White Beryl, f. 158b, comments that these are inauspicious and the
worst class of mediocre relationships because mountain harms fire,
space harms air, water harms iron, and earth harms wood.
184 Tib. 'dre-lnga, which is symbolised in the spar-kha by five points.
White Beryl, ff. 158b-159a, comments that these are inauspicious and
the best class of worst relationships because fire burns iron, air
disturbs earth, wood grows into space, and water descends through
mountains.
185 Tib. bdud-gcod, which is symbolised in the spar-kha by a ritual dagger
(phur-bu). White Beryl, f. 159a, comments that these are inauspicious
and the mediocre class of worst relationships because space hates
fire, wood hates iron, water hates earth, and air hates mountains.
186 Tib. lus-chad-pa, identified with bla-gnas 'gug-sa, which is symbolised
in the spar-kha by a body part or penis. White Beryl, f. 159a, comments
that these are inauspicious and the worst class of worst relationships
because they resemble a mad woman releasing stored water with a
pick-axe.
187 On these diverse relationships between the trigrams, see Part 11,
pp. 106-107; also P. Cornu, Tibetan Astrology, pp. 123–125.
Favourable and unfavourable prognoses may also be made on the
basis of the subject's current trigram alone, in which case the
directions relative to the trigram in question indicate the favourable
and unfavourable directions for undertaking diverse activities in a
given year.
188 White Beryl, f. 158b, mentions three modes of computation, an outer
one (phyi-skor) based on the cycle of the discrete elements themselves
in which females count anti-clockwise from Li to Khen and males
clockwise from Khon to Dva; an inner one (nang-skor) (also given
here) in which males count from Li and females from Kham; and an
intermediate one (bar-skor) based on the trigram of one's own year,
in which males count clockwise and females anti-clockwise.
189 On the ‘heavenly gate' (gnam-sgo) and earthly gate (sa-sgo), see
above, notes 96-97; and on the adversarial signs and their
calculation, see below, p. 117.
190 On the terms, ra-ru (goat-horns') and bse-ru (ʻrhino-horns'), see
above, note 176.
191 On all these identifications, see White Beryl, f. 141a.
192 See the chart of daily trigrams in P. Cornu, Tibetan Astrology, p. 196.
193 Moonbeams, f. 12a, reads ma-rlung for ma-klung.
194 The planets (Tib. gza'; Skt. graha) are said to have been derived from
the divination turtle's eight limbs. Rahu, the eclipser or descending
node of the moon, is all-pervasive, and not confined to one spatial
direction. For the mythological origins of the planets in the Indian
tradition, see P. Cornu, Tibetan Astrology, pp. 143-145; and for an
interpretation of the significance of the weekdays, ibid, pp. 175-178.
195 On the sectors of growth and decline (dar-gud), see below,
pp. 112-114.
196 i.e. that Jupiter represents earth, and Saturn wood.
197 As stated above, these twenty-eight constellations (skar-ma nyi-shu
brgyad) are said to have derived from the twenty-eight vertebrae of
the divination turtle. See the chart in P. Cornu, Tibetan Astrology,
pp. 136–143.
198 Thus, the Sanskrit names for the corresponding twelve months are
derivative: Mārgaśirsa, Pausa, Māgha, Phālguna, Caitra, Vaišākha,
Jyaistha, Āsādha, Srāvana, Bhādrapada, Āśvina and Kārttika.
199 Of these three, only the first is examined in White Beryl, Ch. 21. See
f. 159b; while the others are examined in the context of the
Divination of Obstacle Years. See also below, Part vi.
200 See Glossary.
201 Tib. dbugs-len, literally meaning 'taking breath'.
202 The four earth years, also known as the 'four adversaries' (gshed-
bzhi), are those of ox, sheep, dog and dragon; while the two water
years are those of mouse and pig.
203 These illustrations are inserted below, p.179.
204 See below, pp. 182-183, for further details.
205 There are different methods of calculation for the divination of natal
horoscope (tshes-rabs las-rtsis) and divination of obstacle years (skag-
rtsis). In the former case, the vitality aspect coincides with the year
calculation (srog lo-la 'babs), the body aspect with the month
calculation (lus zla-ba-la 'babs), the destiny aspect with the date
calculation (dbang-thang zhag-la 'babs) and the luck aspect with the
hour calculation (klung-rta dus-la 'babs). In the latter case, all four
aspects fall on the present year (tshang-ma gnam-lo-la 'babs). In the
case of one born in the iron tiger year, for example, the vitality
aspect (srog-gi dar-gud) coincides with clothing' (gos) during the ox
year (gnam-lo glang).
206 As stated above, note 70, the twelve seasonal months are said to be
derived from the divination turtle's twelve sectors of growth and
decline.
207 Note that these calculations may concern the element wood itself, or
its corresponding vitality, body, destiny, luck, constitutional type,
trigram, numeric square, and so forth.
208 By counting in rotational sequence, one can arrive at the 'growth and
decline sector' for a given year, month, day or hour.
209 i.e. the years of the ox (glang), sheep (lug), dog (khyi) and dragon
('brug). In this connection, there is a mnemonic which reads:
The sheep and the trigram Khon form the tomb-sign for the
wood element (shing-gi dur lug dang spar-kha khon).
The dog and the trigram Khen form the tomb-sign for the fire
element (me'i dur khyi dang spar-kha khen).
The ox and the trigram Gin form the tomb-sign for the iron
element (lcags-kyi dur glang dang spar-kha gin).
The dragon and the trigram Zon form the tomb-sign for the
water and earth elements (chu-dang sa'i dur 'brug dang spar-
kha zon).



407
Notes
210 See also the chart on Plate 9, fig. 3; also pp. 249–251.
211 On this conjunction of the multiple of nine with the tomb-sign, see
also below, p. 251.
212 Tib. mar-gyi lnga thun-lo-pa. This calculation is made by consecutive
numbering. In the case of one born in a tiger year, the ‘accursed year'
will be that of the horse.
213 Tib. dur bzhi, i.e. the tomb aspects of the four elements: iron (lcags-
dur), water and earth (chu-dang sa'i dur), fire (me'i dur) and wood
(shing-gi dur).
214 See below, pp. 250–251.
215 See below, pp. 254–255.
216 Tib. rang-Inga'i byi-ba suggests any one of the five mouse years
within the sixty-year cycle, corresponding to the destiny element of
the subject's own natal year.
217 i.e. those of ox, dragon, sheep and dog; as well as those of mouse and
pig.
218 See below, Part vi, p. 249, where the calculations pertaining to the
tomb-sign are further discussed.
219 See the above chart, p. 89.
220 i.e. those whose vitality elements are earth or water are born in an
ox, dragon, sheep, dog, mouse or pig year. The two sorts whose
vitality element is wood are born in a tiger or hare year, those whose
vitality element is fire are born in a horse or snake year, and those
whose element is iron are born in a bird or monkey year.
221 See below, Part vi.
Plod.
Part III
1 See above, Part ii, note 96.
2 For an example of such a request, see G. Dorje, 'The
Guhyagarbhatantra and its xivth Century Commentary Phyogs-bcu
mun-seľ, Vol. 2, pp. 756–764.
3 See above, pp. 53 and 92.
4 The drawings illustrating the locations of the geomantic spirit lords
of the years and months comprise two distinct series, one with the
names of the spirit lords traditionally inscribed in black and the
other in red. Here, the latter are shown in grey/brown type.
5 See above, p. 87.
6 These include the ‘empty vase' calculation (bum-stong-gi rtsis), and
the calculation of the movement of the monthly aspects of the royal
dog Hal-khyi (White Beryl, ff. 464a),
7 For a discussion and depiction of the subterranean 1To'-phye spirit
lord, see G. Dorje, “The Guhyagarbhatantra and its xivth Century
Commentary Phyogs-bcu mun-seľ, Vol. 2, p. 759, also note 7.
8 The centre is occupied by the spirit lords of the soil most closely
associated with the month and its corresponding zodiacal sign. The
inner grid indicates the relative position of the body parts of the
subterranean 1To'-phye spirit, while the outer grid indicates the
relative positions of the other spirit lords of the month, including the
first fifty of the sixty-four of inauspicious nature, the gNam-thig ser-
nag drug and the Sribs-kyi nag-drug. As above, the series inscribed in
red is shown in a different colour type. Opportune passageways are
suggested by double positive markers (oo) and inopportune
passageways by double negative markers (++).
9 The other calculations in this group concern: the 'lesser black days'
(nyi-ma nag-chung; 2); the movement of the spirit lords Pi-ling (3),
'Phar-ma (4-13), Zin-phung (14), Phung-po zor-thogs (15), Ki-kung
(16), Hal-khyi nag-po (17) and gNam-gyi nag-po (18), and the
latter's daily conjunctions or gNam-sbyor (19); planetary
disturbances (gza'-rgod 'byung-ba; 20); the days associated with
dNgul-po lag-stong (21), gZa'-bdun zas-tshol pho-nya 'gyed (22),
Ngam-shing rgya-tshul (23), Bar-khyi (24), Ka-khyung ki-kang (25),
Dra-chen (26) and Ra-hu (27); the eight classes of spirits (sde-brgyad
spyi; 28); and the times for reversing their influences (sa-bdag bzlog-
pa'i dus bstan-pa; 29–39), and so forth.
10 White Beryl, f. 83b, adds a note here concerning the positions of the
spirit lord Sa'i 'phung-byed nag-mo during the course of the day:
at daybreak on the 26th and 13th; at sunrise on the 14th; in the
morning on the 5th; at noon on the 1st, 15th and 29th; in the
afternoon on the 16th and 27th; at sunset on the 7th and 24th; at
twilight on the 17th and 30th; in the late evening on the 2nd, 4th and
11th; at midnight on the 3rd, 10th, 12th, 18th, 19th, 20th and 25th;
after midnight on the 22nd; and at dawn on the 6th, 8th, 9th, 21st,
23rd and 28th.
11 The schematic charts in White Beryl suggest that Dur-len appears in
this sector instead of Tsang-kun, as well as in Yellow sw.
Part IV
i Divination concerning marriage is actually completed on Plate 9.
2 Also called mtha'-rtsis.
3 These are so named because they are fixed and unchanging markers.
4 These are so named because they indicate the contrasting
relationships between the subject's four aspects and the five luck
aspects on which the divination is based.
5 These are the pebbles through which the final divination tally is
determined.
6 Dr Tshul-khrims rGyal-mtshan adds that the mat should be white.
7 Alongside these schematic charts, models of which are now
presented, the system of natal horoscope will often include two of the
exemplary computational charts among the Thirty Chinese and
Tibetan Computational Charts (rGya-bod skor-'go sum-cu), which are
described below, Part x. In the case of the present model, these are
the charts of the Golden Crossed Vajra (gser-gyi rdo-rjel rdo-rje rgya-
gram), which concerns the vitality of a male subject, and the chart of
the Eight-petalled Lotus (padma 'dab-brgyad), which concerns the
luck of important or educated persons and artisans.
8 See above, pp. 64–65. White Beryl, f. 161b, explains that in the case of
an earth constitutional type, the year of greater penalty (chad-chen) is
the dragon and the year of lesser penalty (chad-chung) is the dog. The
destiny years (dbang-lo) are the ox and sheep, while those in a
mother-relationship (ma-lo) are the horse and snake, those in a son-
(bu-lo) relationship are the bird and monkey, those in a friend-
relationship (grogs-lo) are the mouse and pig, while those in an
enemy-relationship (dgra-lo) are the tiger and hare. Similar
calculations are made for the fire, wood, iron and water
constitutional types.
9 Tib. rtsi-dus rkyang-rtsis dus-tshod. White Beryl comments (f. 161b)
that this is the view of the scholar Khyung-nag ſāk-ya Dar-rgyas, in
contrast to certain other views which hold this to be the hour of the
subject's birth.
10 On these five conjunctions, see above, p. 68.
11 The following pebbles are placed as markers to identify the five
important sectors without error (mi-nor-ba'i rde'u), corresponding to
the five luck aspects. See below, note 19.
12 According to Dr Tshul-khrims rGyal-mtshan, this calculation refers
to the log-men of the father coinciding with the birth of the subject.
13 According to White Beryl, there is an alternative tradition, according
to which the natal year-sign of the mother should be utilised.
14 See the charts that follow, indicating the methodology now
employed at the Lhasa sMan-rtsis-khang for natal horoscope
divination.
15 Regarding the actual number of white or black pebbles employed to
represent these contrasting relationships, see above, p. 141.
16 The calculation of the enemy-relationship pebbles is inverse so that
the enemy-relationship will not outweigh the subject's own luck
aspect, i.e. if it is black it will be beneficial for the subject and bad for
the subject's enemies.
17 See above, pp. 112-114. The pebble marking the year is associated
with the subject's vitality, the one marking the month with the
subject's body element, the one marking the day with the subject's
destiny element, and the one marking the hour with the subject's
luck element.
18 Tib. rtsa-rdel bcu-gnyis. These comprise the four precious pebbles, the
one special pebble, the two indispensable pebbles, and the five
pebbles of unchanging luck.
19 This is the view presented in White Beryl, f. 162a. The five luck
aspects (klung-Inga), as stated above, p. 142, are those of the father's
log-men, the mother's log-men, trigram and numeric square, and the
subject’s natal month. On the expressions, “established forward luck’
and backward void luck’, see below, p. 184.
20 According to White Beryl, f. 162a, the ancient Chinese divination
tradition emphasises the destiny element, while the ‘new tradition'
(rtsis-pa gsar-ma lugs) emphasises the vitality element.
21 i.e. the Phug-pa school.
22 Tib. gSal-sgron rtsa-ba.
23 i.e. this view is not given much credence by Lo-chen.
24 For a more detailed profile derived from other sources see P. Cornu,
Tibetan Astrology, pp. 65–72 and pp. 75–84.
25 See above, note 20.
26 The treacherous spirits of affliction (phung-sri) are camel-headed
oath-violators who cause diverse sorts of disaster and afflictions
when unexorcised. At the time of exorcism, camel skulls filled with
appropriate charms should be interred. See Nebesky-Wojkowitz,
Oracles and Demons of Tibet, pp. 300-302.
27 The klu-sman are described as the offspring of the union of a male
serpentine spirit (nāga) and a female lake-dwelling spirit (sman-mo).
See Nebesky-Wojkowitz, Oracles and Demons of Tibet, p. 202.
28 The klu-btsan are the hybrid offspring of a serpentine spirit (nāga)
and a haunting spirit (btsan).
29 The bse-rags are considered to be a sub-category of either the
bewitchers ('gong-po) or the oath-violators (dam-sri). See Nebesky-
Wojkowitz, Oracles and Demons of Tibet, p. 284.
30 Tib. 'khor-lo rab-stongs skar-ma. See White Beryl, ff. 177b-178a.
31 Tib. phe'u sha-ral skar-ma. See White Beryl, f. 178a.
32 Tib. bya-dmar me-len skar-ma. See White Beryl, f. 178a.
33 Tib. gshin-chu rab-bsrung skar-ma. or gshin-chu rab-brgal skar-ma. See
White Beryl, f. 178a.
34 Tib. sbas-pa mdzub-tshugs. This refers to the direct oral transmission.
35 See below, Part vii. For an interpretation of each of the thirty
calendar days of the lunar month, as well as the general significance
of the days governed by the animal signs, trigrams and numeric
squares, see P. Cornu, Tibetan Astrology, pp. 179-198.
36 For an account of natal predictions based on the related sixty
hexagrams of the I Ching, see W.K. Chu and W.A. Sherill, The
Astrology of I Ching, pp. 75–451.
87 A lake-dwelling mermaid (sman-mo) who functions also as a lifelong
companion ('go-lha).
38 Tib. Iha-dpal 'dre-bdud.
39 Tib. pha-ma lha.
40 Tib. bu-tsha dpal.
41 Tib. thub-pa 'dre.
42 Tib. mi-thub bdud.
43 Tib. mthun-pa tshe. White Beryl, f. 186b, initially provides the example
of a child born in the horse or snake year. If birth coincides with the
subject's Zin (wood) trigram, the child will live more than seventy-
three years, as if its parents were gods; if it coincides with one of the
four intermediate (earth) trigrams, the child will live for sixty-one
years and have ‘glorious offspring’; if it coincides with the Li (fire)
trigram, the child will have an average lifespan of forty-nine years,
i.e. a 'harmonious life’; if it coincides with the Dva (iron) trigram, the
child will live to the age of thirty-seven with a 'potent spirit'; and if it
coincides with the Kham (water) trigram, the child will die at birth
like an 'impotent demon’. See the chart on Plate 3 for a full
comparison of these aspects to the twelve year-signs.
44 White Beryl, f. 186b, adds that, among the worst prognoses, if the
birth of a child in the wood tiger or hare year coincides with the Dva
(iron) trigram of the mother, it may die at the age of fifteen; if the
birth of a child in the iron bird or monkey year coincides with the Li
(fire) trigram of the mother, it may die at the age of twelve; if the
birth of a child in the fire horse or snake year coincides with the
Kham (water) trigram of the mother, it may die at the age of nine; if
the birth of a child in the water mouse or pig year coincides with one
of the four intermediate trigrams of the mother, it may die at the age
of six; and if the birth of a child in the earth ox, sheep, dog or dragon
year coincides with the Zin (wood) trigram of the mother, it may die
at the age of three.
45 White Beryl, ff. 186b-187a, adds that, among the worst prognoses,
when the body element is iron there will be chronic tuberculosis,
when it is fire there will be fevers and heart-disease, when it is water
there will be kidney diseases, dropsy and oedemata, when it is earth
there will be spleen diseases and haemorrhoids, and when it is wood
there will be liver diseases and abdominal spasms.
46 White Beryl, f. 187a, adds that among the worst prognoses, when the
destiny element is iron, children born in the tiger or hare year will
end the family line, when it is fire those born in the bird or monkey
year will do so, as will those born in the horse or snake year when the
destiny element is water, those born in the mouse or pig year when
the destiny element is earth, and those born in the ox, dragon, sheep
or dog year when the destiny element is wood.
47 White Beryl(f. 187b), adds that among the worst prognoses, when the
luck element is iron, weapons of war will be amassed, when it is fire,
the countryside and houses will be burnt, when it is water, the land
will be flooded, when it is earth the land will be blighted, and when it
is wood there will be missiles and ruined houses.
48 See White Beryl, f. 187a.
49 Tib. dpal-babs-Inga.
50 Tib. byur-babs.
51 Tib. rang-rkang Inga.
52 Tib. mdangs-shor Inga.
53 Tib. tshe-len-Inga.
54 See above, pp. 112-114.
55 See above, p. 117.
56 See above, p. 117.



408
The White Beryl
90 Omitted on the Plate, but see above, p. 87. Note that Lo-chen
Dharmasri's enumeration of the twelve ‘accursed years' given here
differs from that outlined above.
91 Tib. nag-'thus. See above, p. 87.
92 Tib. spar-sme'i bsdoms-rtsis. According to Dr Tshul-khrims rGyal-
mtshan, this combined calculation determines the elements in a
positive mother- or son-relationship with a child, thereby predicting
the colour of clothing to be worn by the child, and so forth. See also
P. Cornu, Tibetan Astrology, pp. 114-118.
93 Tib. rTsa-ba'i grel-pa nyi-shu.
94 On the methodology of these texts, see above, pp. 140-144. The
sGang-sgril in particular is attributed to Khyung-nag ſāk-ya Dar-
rgyas.
95 The manuscript has no entry in these four sections. It may be the
case that the scull indicative of death, which is depicted in the first
sector, applies to all the others.
96 This methodology accords with the general technique for deploying
the pebbles in the ‘fixed-system' of natal horoscope. See above,
pp. 140-144.
97 White Beryl, f. 214a, contrasts this analysis with the previous analysis
for the body element, in that the first suggests that the enemy-
relationship is flourishing, while the second suggests that the friend-
relationship is in decline.
98 See pp. 112-114.
99 On the placement of pebbles for this mode of divination, see above,
p. 142.
100 Note that above, p. 112, these are referred to as byur-ngan lhung-ba
bzhi.
57 One would expect to see the sector of ‘clothing' included among the
twelve, rather than the adversarial tomb-sign’. Lo-chen, f. 25a, in
order to differentiate dur-sa and dur-gshed, which are generally
considered to be identical when the twelve sectors of growth and
decline are enumerated, omits the sector of clothing (gos) from the
calculation.
58 MS here reads rgya-ma ldog (sic).
59 Tib. rgya-ma klung.
60 Tib. gyen-'phar.
61 Tib. gyen-lta.
62 Tib. thur-babs.
63 For an example of this calculation, see the chart above, p. 162.
64 NB. Lo-chen, f. 25a, reads Items for stongs.
65 NB. Lo-chen, f. 25a, reads sdod for sdong.
66 Note that here Lo-chen, f. 25a, reverses the positions of sdod and kha-
ral, and equates sdod with the dur-gshed aspect, following the
‘profound system' of calculation (zab-lugs). See White Beryl, f. 188b.
67 Tib. srid-kha bu-mo-la 'gro-ba yin.
68 Tib. spen-pa sum-'dom. The term “triple conjunction' indicates that
the outer planetary aspect or destiny element, the intermediate
planetary aspect or group of animal signs and the inner planetary
aspect or trigram are all in conjunction, in this case with the planet
Saturn.
69 Tib. dmar-sum'dom.
70 Tib. phur-bu sum-'dom.
71 Tib. Ihag-pa sum-'dom.
79 Tib. lo-gros rhyang-pa pha-dang ma.
73 Tib. khyim-gcig tshog-pa. See White Beryl, f. 205b, where these
combined calculations are mentioned. The combination of trigrams
Li and Kham with the mouse, dragon and monkey years is called the
household of generals' (dmag-dpon-dag-gi khyim), the combination of
trigram Dva and Zin with the tiger, horse and dog years is called the
household of guests' (mgron-po dag-gi khyim), the combination of
trigram Khen and Zon with the hare, sheep and pig years is called the
‘household of kings' (rgyal-po dag-gi khyim), while the combination of
trigrams Khon and Gin with the bird, ox and snake years is called the
household of captains' (sde-dpon dag-gi khyim).
74 See above, p. 109.
75 See above, p. 69.
76 i.e. the destiny element among the five elements, the vitality element
of the year-sign, and the constitutional type of the trigram.
77 Tib. gcod-'bral rde-drug.
78 Tib. bskyed-dang gcod-pa. This refers to friend- and enemy-
relationships. See above, p. 156.
79 On the predictions pertaining to this divination, see White Beryl,
f. 206a/b.
80 Tib. sbas-pa' mdzub-tshugs-skor.
81 Tib. 'ching-'gags tshud-pa. This term, also rendered as rgya-ma 'ching-
'gags, refers to the inauspicious predictions of short lifespan.
82 Tib. rgya-ma'i 'ur-rdo. White Beryl, f. 210a, identifies this term with
slingshot of the mother's luck aspecť (ma-klungs 'ur-rdo), and
defines it as the slingshot afflicting human birth in the tomb sector
during the first seasonal months, the slingshot afflicting wealth
during the mid-seasonal months, and the slingshot afflicting cattle
during the last seasonal months. Special thread-crosses ('ur-rdo
mdos) should be made to avert these circumstances.
83 The detailed divinations concerning marriage (bag-rtsis) are
described below in Part v.
84 See above, pp. 88, 104 and 107.
85 White Beryl, f, 212a, comments that once the age has been counted
into even- and odd-numbered numeric squares, trigrams or animal
signs, ill-health and so forth may be determined by whichever
category is greater, particularly if the accursed (nag-'thus) group of
four iron and eight fire years is in preponderance. It is said that there
is no advantage when the calculation is unclear, such as when odd
numbers emerge from even pairs and even pairs from odd numbers.
It is nowadays speculated that the indefinite age of uncertain
numbers may include comatose persons. For further detail on the
numbers which are compatible, inauspicious or provocative in terms
of the even and odd trigrams, see White Beryl, f. 224b.
86 See above, p. 87.
87 Note that the last of the three ‘soaring black son’ years or iron
monkey is illustrated on Plate 5, fig. 15, along with the four 'black
fanged years' (mche-ba-can bzhi), for which reason the caption 'four
black fanged years' has been omitted here.
88 Omitted on the Plate, but see above, p. 87.
89 Here, the Plate adds the wood monkey year, but as stated above,
p. 87, the middle row should comprise only the water snake.
101 One of the group of five lifelong companion gods ('go-ba'i lha lnga).
For a description, see Nebesky-Wojkowitz, Oracles and Demons of
Tibet, p. 327.
102 White Beryl, f. 219b reads rang-lus las-kyis rnyed, suggesting that the
child obtains its own body as the result of past actions.
103 The zhang-lha and ma-lha are also counted among the group of five
lifelong companion gods ('go-ba'i lha Inga), the former assuming the
form of a mature adult male, and the latter a female form, its function
being to increase and guard the family. See Nebesky-Wojkowitz,
Oracles and Demons of Tibet, pp. 328 and 332.
104 See above, p. 133.
105 Tib. Ite-ba khar-za 'dud-pa.
106 The term 'vital energy' (rlung) includes not only life-breath, but also
the vital energies of excretion/reproduction, vocalisation, digestion
and metabolism/muscular movement. See also Glossary.
107 See below, Part vil.
20 On the role of the protector deity Brahmā, in general, see Nebesky-
Wojkowitz, Oracles and Demons of Tibet, pp. 145–153. Lha-yi srung-
ma is described as a white deity brandishing a white snare who
stands as a protector before the main Brahmā deity.
21 The contrast between the vitality elements of the couple's natal
months determines the steadiness of their future relationship, the
contrast between their natal trigrams determines their offspring,
the contrast between their constitutional types determines which
partner will die first, and the contrast between their mothers'
constitutional types determines whether they will engage in sexual
misconduct.
22 Tib. rTsa-ba'i rang-'grel nyi-shu-pa.
23 Tib. 'byung-ba gso-bskyed dgra-grogs-kyis.
24 See above, p. 107.
25 See also W.K. Chu and W.A. Sherill, The Astrology of I Ching, p. 452,
where Yellow Five is substituted by Black Two and White Eight in
the case of male and female subjects respectively.
26 See above, pp. 196–199.
27 i.e. gi-gong khug-pa, on which see above, pp. 205–207.
28 It is traditionally held that the marriage will be auspicious if the
vitality element of the groom coincides with a sector of growth and
that of the bride with a sector of decline.
29 Here, the Plate appears to bear the letter Ya. See however the
identical chart in Nag-rtsis rdel-'grem 'bras-bshad, Appendix, which
suggests that the ri-rab earth symbol should also be depicted here, as
it is above Lha-mtshams.
30 See Nebesky-Wojkowitz, Oracles and Demons of Tibet, p. 101, where
the one-legged malign goblin (the'u -rang rkang- gcig) is identified as
an aspect of Pehar.
31 i.e. a trigram in an enemy-relationship to the vitality element (spar-
kha'i srog-dgra).
32 According to Dr Tshul-khrims rGyal-mtshan, this refers to the
vitality element of the trigram (spar-kha'i khams-kyi srog).
33 Moonbeams, f. 27a, reads zong-brdal bag-ma.
34 These are enumerated above, p. 174.
35 Moonbeams, f. 27a, misreads Idig-nag for lding-nag.
36 Moonbeams, f. 27b, misreads khram-shing 'jug for khram-shing mjug.
37 Alternatively zong-brdal bag-ma or zor-thal bag-ma.
38 See above, pp. 115-117.
39 See above, Part 11, notes 96–97.
40 Note that the plate misreads 18 for 12.
41 On the relative positions of these spirit lords of the soil, see above,
Part 111.
42 Note that while Lo-chen includes dar-gud in this list, White Beryl
instead refers to the 'calculation of the nuptial numbers in
combination with the bridal spirits' ('dom-sbrags). See above,
pp. 217–218.
43 See above, p. 128.
44 Tib. mnye-bo mthun-sum lo-pa. See above, p. 69.
45 Tib. lus-mthun rta-khris srog-mas bya.
46 Tib. srog-mthun zla-mo
47 Tib. grogs-sam dbang-thang ma-yi zas-drangs. White Beryl appears to
suggest that the parents should perform this role if they are sound in
body and prosperous.
48 Tib. bdun-zur dgra-los sna-tshogs bya. These duties are not specified,
but are said to include the preparation of ornaments, hair-dressing,
and the bridal dress. This person should not however escort the bride.
49 Unidentified sources. However, White Beryl does mention the Rin-
chen kun-'dus of rGya-phrug dKon-rin, the rGyud-lung kun-'dus of
sPug-ston, the dPag-bsam ljon-shing of sNyan-grong-pa, and its
commentary the gSal-byed shun-lpags 'grel-pa ljon-shing mdzes-rgyan
gsal-ba'i me-long rin-chen phreng-ba as important sources on marriage
divination. In particular, it states that the kham-yu section is derived
from the Rin-chen spungs-pa and the twelve khri-sgo section from the
Rin-chen kun-'dus. For a description of Tibetan marriage ceremonies
in general, see So-sbrang-thar rgya-mtsho, Gro-tshang sa-cha'i bag-
ston-gyi cho-ga me-tog tshombu.
Part V
i In addition to the detailed information given in this section, the
reader might refer to W.K. Chu and W.A. Sherill, The Astrology of I
Ching, pp. 452-457, and P. Cornu, Tibetan Astrology, pp. 12–14, for an
account of incompatible and compatible animal signs.
2 Plate 7 depicts a bird rather than a mouse.
3 Tib. sgab-kyang chad.
4 White Beryl, at this juncture, includes the bird instead of the monkey
as depicted here.
5 Tib. mthun-sbyor gnyan-pa'i rtsis.
6 The contrast between the couple's vitality elements determines the
length or duration of their relationship, the contrast between their
body elements determines the prospects of their children, the
contrast between their destiny elements determines their future
wealth, and the contrast between their luck elements determines
their reputation.
7 This means that the auspicious tally of the vitality and luck elements
should be higher for men and those of body and destiny elements for
women.
8 i.e. according to the accurate divination of the new Phug-pa school.
9 Tib. 'byung-ba'i spun-grangs rtsis.
10 This will determine whether the husband or wife is dominant
11 Note that the painting depicts Khen for Zon.
12 The illustration depicts Khen instead of Zon.
13 The plate misreads ngan-sdebs.
14 The plate misreads li-ngan.
15 The plate misreads khon-ngan.
16 The plate wrongly depicts Zin for Gin.
17 White Beryl, f. 236b, omits Zin, which is clearly depicted on Plate 17,
fig. 11.
18 Here the plate misreads gnyis for Inga.
19 Tib. sbyin-sreg. On the various types of homa offering, those of
pacification, enrichment, subjugation and wrath, see Glossary.
Part VI
1 White Beryl, f. 248b, also mentions other enumerations.
2 Another practical calculation of obstacle years is given in P. Cornu,
Tibetan Astrology, pp. 229-232.
3 Tib. phyi. Moonbeams, f. 28a, erroneously reads spyi.
4 White Beryl, f. 248b, states that this last pebble represents the hour at
which the divination is made (rtsi-dus rdel).
5 See p. 86.
6 Tib. phung-gyod lnga. See above, p. 86.
7 Tib. bye-bral Inga. See above, p. 86.



409
Notes
13 See Nebesky-Wojkowitz, Oracles and Demons of Tibet, p. 302.
14 The klu-srin are a cross between the serpentine spirits (nāga) and the
cannibalistic ogres (rāksasa). See Nebesky-Wojkowitz, Oracles and
Demons of Tibet, p. 310.
15 The klu-sman are a cross between the serpentine spirits (nāga) and
the lake-dwelling mermaids (sman-mo). See Nebesky-Wojkowitz,
Oracles and Demons of Tibet, p. 202.
16 This inscription is omitted on the Plate.
17 The twenty-one ‘lay protectors' (dge-bsnyen), named after their
respective mountain abodes, are enumerated in Nebesky-Wojkowitz,
Oracles and Demons of Tibet, pp. 222-223.
8 Tib. rus-chod Inga. See above, p. 86.
9 Tib. 'byor-pa Inga. See above, p. 86.
10 Tib. 'ju-thag rten-phur gnam-sa'i rgyang. On these four aspects, see
above, p. 86.
11 See above, Part iv, note 101.
12 See above, p. 87.
13 See above, p. 62.
14 Tib. log-men le-lag.
15 Tib. bdud-gcod and bla-khyams. On how these aspects are determined
when the vitality and destiny aspects of a subject's own log-men enter
into an enemy-relationship with the corresponding aspects of the
subject's natal year, see above, p. 86.
16 This convergence, known as rkya-mda'or skyam-zla (See Moonbeams,
f. 29a), occurs when the calculation of the current male trigram,
counted forwards, and the current female trigram, counted
backwards, coincide on an identical trigram.
17 Moonbeams, f. 29a, misreads bza'-shugs for gza'-shug.
18 In White Beryl, f. 255a, this term is rendered as rkya-mda'.
19 Tib. gsang-keg rkun-bus rtsub-pa. NB White Beryl, f. 255b, reads rkun-po
for rkun-bus.
20 These four trigram stacks correspond respectively to the I Ching
hexagrams 64 (Wei Chi/Harmony), 28 (Da Guo/Great Injury),
25 (Wu Wang/Innocence), and 23 (Po/Finality of Death). Of these
the first and third correspond in meaning, while the others do not.
21 On this class of spirits, see Nebesky-Wojkowitz, Oracles and Demons
of Tibet, pp. 300–302.
22 This last stack corresponds to the I Ching hexagram 12
(P'i/Separation).
23 This stack appears to correspond to the radically different hexagram
64 (Wei Chi/Harmony).
24 This stack corresponds closely in meaning to hexagram 28
(Da Guo/Great Injury).
25 This stack corresponds to hexagram 14 (Da You/Great
Possessions).
26 This stack corresponds to hexagram 7 (Shi/Mass of Humanity).
27 Respectively these stacks appear to correspond to the hexgrams 38
(K'uei/Wrathful Eye of the Ancestors) and 7 (Shi/Mass of
Humanity)
28 This stack corresponds to hexagram 27 (Yi/Food Eating Food).
29 This stack corresponds to hexagram 24 (Fu/Turning Back).
30 This stack corresponds to hexagram 26 (Da Chu/Great
Involvement)
31 This stack corresponds to hexagram 24 (Fu/Turning Back).
32 This stack corresponds to hexagram 13 (Tongren/People Fitting
Well Together).
33 i.e. the trigrams of the four intermediate directions, on which see
above, p. 107.
34 This stack corresponds to I Ching hexagram 48 (Jing/Community
Spirit).
35 This stack corresponds to I Ching hexagram 50 (Ding/Law of the
Land).
36 This stack corresponds to I Ching hexagram 35 (Chin/Gathering).
37 This stack corresponds to I Ching hexagram 43 (Kuai/Decisive
Moment).
38 This stack corresponds to I Ching hexagram 47 (Kun/Reaching the
Limits).
39 This stack corresponds to I Ching hexagram 14 (Da You/Great
Possession).
40 This stack corresponds to I Ching hexagram 28 (Da Guo/Great
Injury).
41 This stack corresponds to I Ching hexagram 19 (Lin/Social
Divisions).
42 The former stack corresponds to hexagram 44 (Kou/Intercourse)
and the latter to hexagram 18 (Ku/Turmoil).
43 See above, Part iv, note 26.
44 Note that on the plate the rows of the four remaining animal signs
and trigrams have been reversed.
45 On these charts, see above, pp. 106-107.
46 The offspring of a malevolent force (bdud) and a haunting spirit
(btsan).
47 On the three lower destinies, see Glossary.
48 As frequently depicted in this work, the vitality element is
represented by the vajra (rdo-rje) and the destiny element by the
svāstika (gYung-drung).
49 The plate misreads White One for Black Two, but see White Beryl,
f. 268a, where the context is clearly stated.
50 Note that the plate here excludes White 6 and 8, but see White Beryl,
f. 268a, and Plate 9, fig. 12, where the entire group of white numbers
is indicated.
51 The term 'bedding' (mal) includes by extension the dwelling place.
52 The identification of Plate 9, fig. 14, owes much to Dr Yumpa of the
sMan-rtsis-khang in Lhasa. One wonders where the artist obtained
the information given in some sections of this table, when the textual
reference in White Beryl is so terse.
53 The plate misreads ma-klungs dgu-log mang-ba.
54 See above, p. 156.
55 See below, Part vil.
56 See also above, p. 117.
57 See above, pp. 250–251.
58 See above, p. 117.
59 The relationship between this calculation and the spirit lord of the
soil known as rNga-zor dmar-po is unclearly defined. The latter is
illustrated in White Beryl (Derge edition), Vol 11, p. 206.
60 On the distinction between the celestial and lake-dwelling genus of
sman-mo, see Nebesky-Wojkowitz, Oracles and Demons of Tibet,
p. 200.
61 A hard gemstone, similar to agate.
62 The illustration of the mouse at the head of the second column
should appear in the second row of the second column.
63 Tib. kha-dmar rdel-bzhi.
64 Tib. spar-sme dgu-mig gsum. Note that in Nag-rtsis rdel-'grem 'bras-
bshad bzhugs-so, p. 24, the last three pebbles are said to represent the
spar-kha, the sme-ba and the log-men.
65 Tib. sbas-pa'i mdzub-tshugs.
66 Tib. nyes-skyon bcos-pa.
67 On the layout of this chart, see also Nag-rtsis rdel-'grem 'bras-bshad,
Appendix, Chart 5.
68 This permutation entails either a horizontal shift, as expounded by
the author of the White Beryl, or a vertical shift, according to the
interpretation of Mi-pham Rin-po-che. The chart shown here
accords with the latter method, which is more widely used at present.
69 The reader should note that in the system utilised by the author of
the White Beryl, only the residual pebble of the second row is placed
at the right margin, while those of the third and fourth rows are
placed at the left margin.
70 The offspring of a serpentine spirit (klu) and attachment spirit
(bsen-mo).
71 On these terms, see above, pp. 205–208; but for their usage in this
specific technique, see also Nag-rtsis rdel-'grem 'bras-bshad,
Appendix, Chart 5.
72 Tib. rgya-nag rdel-skor.
73 Tib. se-brdar ris. Note that in White Beryl, f. 252a, the term is given as
gsegs-rdar ris.
74 Tib. rkyang-pa'i rdel-skor.
75 Tib. 'gugs.
76 Tib. rgya-gsum kha-sprod.
77 Tib. spang-rgyan lo-ma'i skor-gsum. On this technique, see also Nag-
rtsis rdel-'grem 'bras-bshad bzhugs-so, pp. 23–24.
78 On these terms, see above, p. 87.
79 Note the alternative spelling mar-gyi drug-'gras.
80 Moonbeams, f. 31a, misreads instrumental bzhi-gshed bzhis for bzhi-
gshed-bzhir.
81 Tib. kha-dmar spyi Inga.
82 Moonbeams, f. 31b, misreads 'phel-'gribs chags-chen for 'phel-'grib
chag-chen.
Part VIII
1 Tib. btsas ma-thag-gi byis-pa. Moonbeams, f. 31b, misreads: btsas ma-
dag-gi byis-pa.
2 Dr Tshul-khrims rGyal-mtshan adds that demonic influences (gdon)
are recognised through the application of this divination concerning
the planets, and retributional consequences (lan-rkyen) are
recognised through the divination concerning the constellations.
Hence, for example, the demonic influence of haunting spirits on
Tuesdays can be determined.
3 For example, 'Od-'bar arises on the 1st, 9th, 17th and 25th calendar
days, while 'Od-ljang arises only on the 7th, 15th and 23rd calendar
days.
4 It is important to note that this and all the following calculations
indicating a specific tiger or hare year do so based on the example of
a subject with a wood element (shing khams-pa).
5 Such afflictions are said to include epilepsy and stroke.
6 White Beryl, f. 275b, reads 'stellar mansions' (skar-khyim) for sgo-
khyim.
7 A group of nine ‘lower demons' (ma-bdud) is enumerated in Nebesky-
Wojkowitz, Oracles and Demons of Tibet, p. 315.
8 Tib. thang-shing.
9 Tib. rtsis-'go bco-lnga.
10 Again, it is important to note that this and the following techniques
which indicate a computational starting point in a tiger or hare year
do so based on the example of a subject with a wood element.
11 Tib. byang-thang rlung- langs ma-langs.
12 Tib. sgo-khyim zhig ma-zhig.
13 Tib. gtan-rtsis; i.e. the fixed system of divination employed in
the natal horoscope (tshe-rabs las-rtsis), as outlined in Partiv,
P. 140 ff.
14 I have so far been unable to identify these masters of elemental
divination within the Chinese tradition.
15 This calculation is presented in the preceding chapter, on the impact
of the hour of divination, pp. 282–284
16 The central pebble should be black, but has wrongly been depicted as
white.
17 The central pebble should be black, but has wrongly been depicted as
white.
18 The central pebble should be white, but has wrongly been depicted as
black.
19 The central pebble should be white, but has wrongly been depicted as
black.
20 The central pebble should be white, but has wrongly been depicted as
black
21 Tib. rtsis-mig.
22 Tib. rtsis-chen bdun.
23 Moonbeams, f. 33b misreads de-dag rde'u-Inga tshan-Ingar.
24 Unidentified.
25 Moonbeams, f. 33b, misreads gnad for gdon.
26 In general, a reading with white pebbles suggests that no action need
be taken; one with variegated pebbles suggests that longevity rites
(zhabs-rten) should be undertaken; and one with black pebbles
indicates that stronger ritual antidotes should be applied.
Part VII
1 On the term 'auspicious coincidence' (rten-'brel), see Glossary.
2 Note that the inscription wrongly reads: zas-gos.
3 See Nebesky-Wojkowitz, Oracles and Demons of Tibet, pp. 6, 281–282.
4 See above, Partiv, note 28.
5 Tib. dar rmad phyug klu gcong-can rabs grir-shi shes-can so-sor dgu.
In both the Lhasa edition (f. 434a.5) and the Derge edition (Vol. 2,
p. 164), the attribute of Yellow Five appears to have been omitted.
6 Further predictions associated with the numeric squares of the
days (nyin-gyi sme-ba) are given in P. Cornu, Tibetan Astrology,
pp. 193–196.
7 Note that the Plate reads sangs ('pure') for bzang (“good”) in this
sector.
8 Note that the Plate reads rgyud for klu.
9 Here the Plate reads klu-sman for klungs-mal, suggesting that the
subject sisters, brothers and their children are harmed by nāgas and
sman-mo spirits.
10 See above, pp. 140-141.
11 See the account of elective divinations given in P. Cornu, Tibetan
Astrology, pp. 235–242.
12 Note that the inscription wrongly reads dur gsum brtan-pa.
Part IX
1 Tib. bla-sems-yid gsum.
2 Tib. gshed-ma.
3 Tib. dur-mdzod rtsis.
4 Tib.gson-gyi khog-nas gshin-dbyung.
5 Tib. gshin-gyi khog-nas gson 'don-pa.
6 Tib.gshin-gyi 'dur-shid brtag-pa.
7 White Beryl indicates that fifty-six pebbles are to be deployed, thirty-
nine of them representing the basic predictions and seventeen being
pebbles of symbolic recognition.



410
The White Beryl
93 Tib. do-bdag.
94 Tib. rkang-bran.
95 On the distinction between the cessation of outer and inner
respiration at the time of death, see G. Dorje and G. Coleman,
The Complete Tibetan Book of the Dead, Ch. 1.
96 These disparate views are discussed in the introduction to G. Dorje
and G. Coleman, The Complete Tibetan Book of the Dead.
97 This period corresponds to the duration of the intermediate state
of the time of death ('chi-kha'i bar-do), during which spiritually
advanced individuals have the potential to realise the buddha-body
of reality (dharmakāya). See G. Dorje and G. Coleman, The Complete
Tibetan Book of the Dead.
98 See above, pp. 122-126.
99 On all these spirit lords of the soil, see above, Part 11.
100 On this distinction, see above, pp. 106-107.
101 For a layout of the divinatory pebbles indicative of the direction for
corpse disposal, see the chart from Bai-dkar bu-yig gshin-rtsis khra-
ma'i dper-brjod gnad-bsdus, f. 35a.
102 The painting depicts the wood hare as the iron hare.
103 Tib. gson-po'i lo.
104 For an illustration of the divinatory pebbles indicative of the
concluding rites which ensure the succession of the family line, see
the chart from Bai-dkar bu-yig gshin-rtsis khra-ma'i dper-brjod gnad-
bsdus, f. 35a.
105 Tib. mjug-gcod gto-chog.
106 Moonbeams, f. 37b, misreads chags-cher for chag-cher.
107 A highly simplified chart of the divinatory pebbles indicative of
public funerals is found in Bai-dkar bu-yig gshin-rtsis khra-ma'i dper-
brjod gnad-bsdus, f. 35a.
108 For an illustration of the divinatory pebbles indicative of the funeral
procession, see the chart from Bai-dkar bu-yig gshin-rtsis khra-ma'i
dper-brjod gnad-bsdus, f. 35a.
109 Tib. 'dur-shid.
110 Note that the block-print here reads shid-kyi yal-ga for shing-gi
yal-ga.
111 Tib. zang-kyam man-ngag. On this term, see White Beryl, f. 418b.
8 See also the elaborate chart in Bai-dkar bu-yig gshin-rtsis khra-ma'i
dper-brjod gnad-bsdus, f. 31b.
9 Tib. bza'-skor phye-bas bar-bcad-la.
10 Tib, keg-rtsis. See above, Part vi.
11 As expounded in White Beryl, ff. 348b-349a, and illustrated on
Plate 11, figs 3–4.
12 Moonbeams, f. 35a, misreads chags for chag.
13 Tib. 'go-gshid.
14 For a model diagram of the placement of the twelve pebbles of the
life-spirits (bla-rdel bcu-gnyis), see the chart in Bai-dkar bu-yig gshin-
rtsis khra-ma'i dper-brjod gnad-bsdus, f. 31b.
15 Tib. gson-rtsis.
16 Tib. chad-chen.
17 Tiba chau-chung.
18 Tib. ma-lo che-ba.
19 Tib. ma-lo chung-ba.
20 i.e. the destiny element year (dbang-lo).
21 Tib. che-lo chung-lo.
22 Tib. 'bras-rdel.
23 Tib. mgo-bskang gnam-thig btab-pa.
24 Tib, rang-rgyud rde'u.
25 Tib. spyi-dang bye-brag khyad-par-gyi dur-sa. These predictions are
enumerated in White Beryl, ff. 349a-351b.
26 Tib. khams, here refers to the element of the subject's year-sign. See
below, p. 313.
27 Tib. dur-Inga.
28 These final rites ensure that the deceased will have descendants to
continue the family line.
29 Tib. gshin-rdel.
30 Tib. rus-khams. This calculation is generally considered to be
synonymous with that of the luck element. Some sources, however,
identify this calculation with the element of the deceased's year-sign.
31 See also Bai-dkar bu-yig gshin-rtsis khra-ma'i dper-brjod gnad-bsdus,
f. 33a.
32 Tib. gson-rde. See above, p. 308.
33 See above, pp. 246–247.
34 On this term, which includes the greater star (lo-skar che-ba) and
the lesser star (lo-skar chung-ba), see above, p. 87 (Moonbeams, f. 7b).
35 See Bai-dkar bu-yig gshin-rtsis khra-ma'i dper-brjod gnad-bsdus, f. 33a.
36 Tib. snyad-dang le-lan.
37 Tib. nad-brgyad 'dre-brgyad-dang| phyugs-brgyad zas-brgyad gos-
brgyad-dang| nor-brgyad mgron-brgyad 'grul-pa brgyad phyogs-brgyad
gnod-brgyad gnod-pa'i sa brgyad-dang rbod-gtong brgyad. Note that in
White Beryl, ff. 353b-354a, where this topic is discussed, the exact
details of these eightfold enumerations are not specified. The
commentary, summarised here in English, does mention the types of
demonic influence, directions, food, cattle and property or wealth
associated with the eight distinct trigrams, but it does not indicate
the associated types of disease, clothing, transport and so forth.
38 Tib. za-'ug. Scholars at the sMan-rtsis-khang Institute have
tentatively suggested that this obscure term could mean ‘an owl for
eating'.
39 See above, Part viii, note 7
40 See above, Part vi, note 69.
41 Unidentified.
42 See Bai-dkar bu-yig gshin-rtsis khra-ma'i dper-brjod gnad-bsdus, f. 33a.
According to White Beryl, there are more elaborate modes of
calculation, employing an additional 116 pebbles of symbolic
recognition, making 123 altogether.
13 Note that above, p. 92, Black Two is said to have an impact on adult
males.
44 For a model of the sixteen divinatory pebbles indicative of the
funeral status, see the chart in Bai-dkar bu-yig gshin-rtsis khra-ma'i
dper-brjod gnad-bsdus, f. 33a.
45 Tib. bar-do. See Glossary.
46 See Bai-dkar bu-yig gshin-rtsis khra-ma'i dper-brjod gnad-bsdus, f. 33a,
where a more detailed presentation is also given.
47 Om ma ni padme hūm, the mantra of the bodhisattva of compassion
Avalokiteśvara, each syllable of which has the potency to purify the
sufferings of a distinct class of sentient beings. See Glossary.
48 Tib. yig-brgya, the mantra of Vajrasattva; see Glossary.
49 This could well be a reference to the birth of Dalai Lama vi, Rig-
'dzin Tshangs-dbyangs rgya-mtsho, in Mon-yul.
50 Unidentified.
51 See Bai-dkar bu-yig gshin-rtsis khra-ma'i dper-brjod gnad-bsdus, f. 33b.
52 This explanation is given below, White Beryl, f. 370b.
53 See also White Beryl, ff. 372b-373a.
54 See Bai-dkar bu-yig gshin-rtsis khra-ma'i dper-brjod gnad-bsdus, f. 33b.
55 Tib. ro-rigs bcu-gcig. Note that whereas White Beryl and the
manuscript both refer to the ‘thirteen types of corpse', Lo-chen
subsumes the categories of yul-Iha and mo-sman under zhan-pa, and
those of ro-gog, sbre-shal and bzed under ngan-pa.
56 Tib. rabs-chad drug. Note that White Beryl only refers at this juncture
to three types of childless corpse.
57 Tib. dme-pho rig-gsum, on which see above, p. 335.
58 Tib. skyon-can brgyad. Note that White Beryl refers only to the skyon-
can bdun, which are enumerated above, p. 335.
59 Tib. bkra-rigs lnga, on which see above, p. 335.
60 Tib. sri'u rigs drug, on which see above, p. 335.
61 Tib. grir shi bzhi, on which see above, p. 335.
62 Tib. gshis-ngan gsum, on which see above, p. 335.
63 Tib. rgod-zhes mtshun.
64 Tib. zhan-pa, i.e. corpses afflicted by yul-lha and mo-sman spirits.
65 Tib. ngan-pa, i.e. corpses of unmarried twenty-year-old men (ro-gog)
or women (sbre-shal), which are believed to be inauspicious.
66 The Plate reads mda'-bral for zla-bral here and in the next caption.
67 The Plate reads bzang-ngan, but see the context described in White
Beryl, f. 366a/b.
68 According to White Beryl, there are altogether 260 pebbles employed
in the divination of distinct elemental funerals, including seventy
basic pebbles, ten minor pebbles and 180 pebbles of symbolic
recognition. For an illustration of the seventy basic divinatory
pebbles, see the chart in Bai-dkar bu-yig gshin-rtsis khra-ma'i dper-
brjod gnad-bsdus, f. 33b, which analyses the five types of elemental
funeral on the basis of thirteen different types of deceased person:
kings, soldiers, spouses, countrymen, paternal and maternal
relatives, widowers, and so forth. The chart presented here accords
with the analysis of Lo-chen Dharmaśrī.
69 Tib. ri-skyel shing.
70 Tib. bsreg-pa me.
71 Tib. sba-ba sa.
72 Tib. sgrub-pa lcags. According to Dr Tshul-khrims rGyal-mtshan,
another tradition defines sgrub-pa as the 'cutting of a corpse with
iron.'
73 Tib. skyur-ba chu.
74 The srang is a traditional weight, nowadays considered equivalent to
one tenth of a jin, approximately 50 grams.
75 See above, p. 335.
76 The six excellent medicinal substances (rtsi-sman bzang-drug)
are enumerated as nutmeg, clove, bamboo pith, saffron, cardamom
and cubeb. See Y. Parfianovich et al., Tibetan Medical Paintings,
pp. 173-174.
77 For an illustration of the divinatory pebbles indicative of the
accoutrements of the corpse, see the chart from Bai-dkar bu-yig
gshin-rtsis khra-ma'i dper-brjod gnad-bsdus, f. 33b.
78 See Bai-dkar bu-yig gshin-rtsis khra-ma'i dper-brjod gnad-bsdus, f. 33b.
According to White Beryl, these pebbles should number two thousand
two hundred and fifty-six when the elaborate mode of divination is
undertaken, but this enumeration includes the pebbles representing
the particular modes of irritation, described in the following
paragraphs.
79 Tib. ra-bse'i ro-zlos.
80 For an illustration of the layout of the most basic pebbles
representing the eight categories of irritation, see Bai-dkar bu-yig
gshin-rtsis khra-ma'i dper-brjod gnad-bsdus, ff. 335–34a.
81 See above, p. 117.
82 See Bai-dkar bu-yig gshin-rtsis khra-ma'i dper-brjod gnad-bsdus, f. 34a.
83 White Beryl, f. 376b, reads chad-ma for chang-ma.
84 See above, p. 174.
85 The four initial constellations (skar-'go bzhi) are those heading each
of the series of constellations associated with the four cardinal
directions, viz.: Kșttikā (smin-drug; Pleiades) in the east, Maghā
(mchu; Regulus) in the south, Anurādhā (lha-mtshams; Iridis) in the
west, and Dhanasta (mon-dre; Delphinium B) in the north.
86 A table indicating the placement of the pebbles for each of these
categories is depicted in Bai-dkar bu-yig gshin-rtsis khra-ma'i dper-
brjod gnad-bsdus, f. 34b.
87 For an illustration of the divinatory pebbles indicative of the eye of
death, see the chart from Bai-dkar bu-yig gshin-rtsis khra-ma'i dper-
brjod gnad-bsdus, f. 34b.
88 See above, pp. 257–258.
89 See Bai-dkar bu-yig gshin-rtsis khra-ma'i dper-brjod gnad-bsdus, f. 34b.
90 Tib. rde'u ro. White Beryl, f. 347a, identifies this mode of calculation
with the divination concerning the 'eye of death' (shi-mig).
91 Tib. gshin-khong gson-dbyung-ba. See above, p. 310.
92 Tib. mag-pa tsha-yug. See White Beryl, f. 347a. Moonbeams, f. 38b, has a
lacuna, omitting the syllables -pa tsha.
Part X
1 According to White Beryl, f. 300b, there is a more elaborate method
employing 3,150 pebbles, and a concise method employing 630
pebbles
2 Here the pebbles are used merely to differentiate the male and female
year calculations, and not to indicate good and bad prognostications.
3 i.e. the year-sign which is found in the centre of each chart and which
is the starting point for the calculations.
4 This text is mentioned as an important source in White Beryl, f. 313b.
5 i.e. on the basis of an identity-relationship.
6 i.e. on the basis of a son-relationship.
7 Female intermediaries or realised embodiments of emptiness,
through whom insight and discriminative awareness are imparted.
8 A ritual of aversion associated with the protector deity Mahākāla.
9 i.e. on the basis of a friend-relationship.
10 i.e. on the basis of an enemy-relationship.
11 i.e. on the basis of a mother-relationship.
12 i.e. on the basis of an identity-relationship.
13 See Nebesky-Wojkowitz, Oracles and Demons of Tibet, p. 303.
14 i.e. on the basis of a son-relationship.
15 i.e. on the basis of a friend-relationship.
16 i.e. on the basis of an enemy-relationship.
17 i.e. on the basis of a mother-relationship.
18 i.e. on the basis of an identity-relationship.
19 i.e. on the basis of a son-relationship.
20 i.e. on the basis of a friend-relationship.
21 i.e. on the basis of an enemy-relationship.
22 i.e. on the basis of a mother-relationship.
23 i.e. on the basis of an identity-relationship.
24 i.e. on the basis of a son-relationship.
25 Tib. byis-pa'i bsdos-tshad-kyi rtsis.
26 i.e. on the basis of a friend-relationship.
27 These zhang-lha are classed among the five lifelong companion gods
('go-lha Inga). See Nebesky-Wojkowitz, Oracles and Demons of Tibet,
pp. 327–328.
28 See Nebesky-Wojkowitz, Oracles and Demons of Tibet, p. 332. The
shoulder-gods (phrag-lha) are included among the category of the
hostile gods (dgra-lha). Specifically, they are said to assume the form
of an armed man, riding a garuda, and act as a life-supporting
guardian for the duration of an individual's life.



411
Notes
21 Dr Tshul-khrims rGyal-mtshan adds that this count should be made
in reverse for male subjects and forwards for female subjects,
contrasting the vitality, body, destiny, luck and numeric square
elements respectively to determine the appropriate outcomes for
gyi-ling steeds, riding horses, yaks, 'bri and ewes.
22 Note that here the five sectors are calculated in the following
sequence: NE-SE-SW-S-Nw.
23 Here the painting appears to depict a man wearing a yak-skin coat.
29 The spirits of vitality (srog-lha), also classed among the dgra-lha and
the lifelong companion gods ('go-lha), are white in colour, holding a
vase of longevity. See Nebesky-Wojkowitz, Oracles and Demons of
Tibet, p. 332.
30 i.e. on the basis of an enemy-relationship.
31 i.e. on the basis of a mother-relationship.
32 The expression rgan-rgon kra refers, for example, to the presence of
four intact generations of a family.
33 i.e. on the basis of an identity-relationship.
34 i.e. on the basis of a son-relationship.
35 i.e. on the basis of a friend-relationship.
36 Tib. ro-rtsis log-ma log. These include prognostications concerning
rebirth.
37 i.e. on the basis of an enemy-relationship.
38 i.e. on the basis of a mother-relationship.
39 On the ‘liberation' of the archetypal rudra, symbol of rampant
egohood, see G. Dorje, ‘The Guhyagarbhatantra and its xivth
Century Commentary Phyogs-bcu mun-seľ, Ch. 15, pp. 1080–1095.
40 i.e. on the basis of an identity-relationship.
41 i.e. on the basis of a son-relationship.
42 i.e. on the basis of an enemy-relationship.
43 i.e. on the basis of a friend-relationship.
44 i.e. on the basis of a mother-relationship.
Conclusion
1 Tib. sa-dpyad. See above, p. 120. Moonbeams, f. 39a, misreads sa-bcad.
2 Tib. brtag-thabs, here defined by Dr Tshul-khrims rGyal-mtshan as
gtan-rtsis.
3 Ch. gyim-shung. Moonbeams, f. 39a, reads gyim-shad.
4 Tib. 'phung-bshig. This term includes the wrathful rites of abhicāra.
5 Tib. bdag-med gnyis-po, i.e. selflessness of the individual person
(pudgalanairātyma) and selflessness with respect to phenomena
(dharmanairātmya). See Glossary.
6 Tib. bdag-ston rig-pa.
7 At this point the publisher's colophon to the Lhasa edition is given,
which may be translated as follows:
When agitation occurs of the outer and inner elements,
Which have materialised through the appearance
of dissonant mental states from atemporal ignorance,
Sufferings hard to bear are generated.
This being the case, how could any other compare with this essential
treatise
Which acts to dispel (such sufferings)!
So, after the damaged woodblocks had been repaired,
This [text] was reprinted by the sMan-rtsis-khang in 1981 (iron bird
year of rab-rgyal).
Through the light-rays of its assembled virtues,
May the lotus of divination science bloom!
Mangalam!
Part XI
1 Tib. 'chi-med rdo-rje'i sku. See NSTB, pp. 139–140.
2 Ritual service (sevā) entails the recitation of mantras and one-
pointed prayerful devotion to a visualised deity; whereas means for
attainment (sādhana) refers to the accomplishments that are
absorbed from the buddhas of the ten directions into the deity and
thence into the subject - in actuality, meditation or dreams. See
Glossary
3 On the significance of commitment' (samaya) in Tibetan Buddhism,
see G. Dorje, 'The Nyingma Interpretation of Commitment and Vow'
in The Buddhist Forum, Vol. 11, pp. 71-95.
4 The plate appears to depict a throne instead of a mandala.
5 The plate appears to depict a rosary instead of a kīla.
6 The five-coloured threads which are sequentially bound and cut in
half (rgyang-bu) are utilised alongside the nam-mkha' to form the
thread-cross implement of exorcism. See Nebesky-Wojkowitz,
Oracles and Demons of Tibet, pp. 369–397.
7 Note that the order of the five sectors differs here from the
description given above.
8 It appears that this vignette and the one preceding it have been
reversed on the painting.
9 It appears that this vignette and the one following it have been
reversed on the painting.
10 Rites employing the ritual dagger in association with rites of
longevity.
11 According to Nebesky-Wojkowitz, Oracles and Demons of Tibet,
p. 302, the god-sri are azure-blue or black in colour, and pig-headed.
12 Here the plate appears to depict a different scene
13 Note that here the five sectors are calculated in the following
sequence: NW-S-SE-SW-NE.
14 Here, the water weeds are distinctly depicted as a robe.
15 According to White Beryl, f. 319b, the divination for subjects of the
tiger, horse or dog signs should be made on the basis of the tiger
symbol in the east (mi-'gyur shar-gyi gzer), starting from the tiger
year in a friend-relationship with the subject; whereas for those of
the mouse, dragon and monkey signs it should be made on the basis
of the dragon symbol in the south (Iho-yi mi-'gyur gzer), starting from
the dragon year in a mother-relationship with the subject; and for
those of the pig, sheep or hare sign, it should be made from the turtle
in the north (byang-gi mi-'gyur gzer), starting from the pig year in an
identity-relationship with the subject's destiny element. Lastly, for
those of the bird, ox or snake signs the divination should be made on
the basis of the red bird symbol in the west (nub-kyi mi-'gyur gzer),
starting from the bird year in a son-relationship with the subject.
16 Note that here the five sectors are calculated in the following
sequence: S-SE-NE-SW-NW.
17 The painting here appears to depict a case of severe corporal
punishment.
18 Note that here the five sectors are calculated in the following
sequence: NE-SE-S-Nw-sw.
19 On this class of wrathful deity see G. Dorje and G. Coleman,
The Complete Tibetan Book of the Dead, Chs 5-6, 11.
20 The painting seems to depict a very different scene.



412
The White Beryl
Glossary and list of abbreviations
The following abbreviations have been used in the text, bibliography and notes.
higher bodhisattva paths. Among the latter are those such as Padmasambhava
and Vimalamitra who have attained the rainbow body through the practices
of the Great Perfection. According to Mahāyoga (see Tantra), the highest
awareness-holders include those of maturation, those abiding on the levels,
those with power over the lifespan, those of the great seal, and those of
spontaneous presence.
Chinese.
Disc.
Discoverer of revealed teachings (gter-ston).
GGFTC
G. Dorje, “The Guhygarbhatantra and its xivth
Century Commentary Phyogs-bcu mun-sel.'
Unpublished PhD thesis. London University,
1987.
Martin
D. Martin, Tibetan Histories. London: Serindia
Publications, 1997.
Moonbeams
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī, 'Byung-rtsis man-ngag zla-
ba'i 'od-zer(English title: Moonbeams: An
Esoteric Instruction on Elemental Divination).
Sman-rtsis Spendzod 82 (1976), Lhasa xylo
edition, 1981.
bdun-zur
See Seventh-removed aspect
Bell dril-bu
A ritual implement, symbolic of emptiness, which is most frequently held
in conjunction with the vajra or the skull-drum.
Bewitchers 'gong-po
A class of malign spirits, headed by Yam-shud dMar-po, who frequent the
atmosphere and the earth, and who were bound under an oath of allegiance to
Buddhism by Padmasambhava during the eighth century. They are ritually
exorcised by means of substitute-offerings (glud) and thread-crosses.
Bodhisattva byang-chub sems-dpa'
A spiritual trainee, dedicated to the cultivation of an enlightened attitude
(cittotpāda) or the altruistic enlightened mind, who is on the path to full
enlightenment, gradually traversing the five bodhisattva paths (pañcamārga) and
ten bodhisattva levels (daśabhūmi). The Sanskrit term bodhisattva, which is defined
as ‘awakening hero' or 'spiritual warrior of enlightenment', denotes a
courageous individual whose entire being is dedicated towards a single goal,
i.e. to bring about the welfare of all sentient beings rather than one's own liberation
from cyclic existence.
Body element lus
One of the four aspects of elemental divination on the basis of which calculations
concerning ill-health may be made in respect of a given year, month, calendar day
or hour. The body elements corresponding to the years of the sexagenary
cycle form thirty neighbouring or adjacent pairs (lus-kyi kha-srog sum-cu).
For the method of calculating the body element of a given year, based on the
trigrams and natal year-signs, see Part 1 of the present work.
MTTWL
P. Pfandt, Mahāyāna Texts Translated into
Western Languages. Cologne: E.J. Brill, 1983.
NGB
Rnying-ma'i rgyud-'bum. Collected Tantras of the
rNying-ma-pa. Thimpu: Jamyang Khyentse
Rinpoche, 1973. 36 vols.
Catalogue by E. Kaneko, Tokyo, 1982.
NL
Not located
NSTB
Dudjom Rinpoche, The Nyingma School of
Tibetan Buddhism: Its Fundamentals and History.
Translated and edited by G. Dorje
and M. Kapstein. Boston: Wisdom Publications,
1991. 2 vols.
Bon
The Tibetan Tripitaka, Peking edition. 168 vols.
Tokyo/Kyoto: Suzuki Research Foundation,
1955–61.
Abiding nature of reality gnas-lugs
Synonym for the ultimate truth or emptiness of the expanse of actual reality
(dharmadhātu). This ‘abiding' mode (gnas-tshul) of emptiness is contrasted
with the apparent mode (snang-tshul) of relative appearances.
Accomplished master grub-thob; Skt. siddha
One who has fully developed the supreme and common spiritual
accomplishments
Accomplishment dngos-grub; Skt. siddhi
Spiritual accomplishments may be supramundane or common. The former
(mchog-gi dngos-grub) refers to the accomplishment of enlightenment or
buddhahood, transcending cyclic existence. The latter (thun-mong-gi dngos-grub)
are a series of eight mystical powers gained through meditative practices
which are based on mantra recitation in the context of specific rituals. They are
‘mundane’ in that the purposes they fulfil are ordinary and such feats can be
acquired without any experience of emptiness (šūnyatā) or enlightened mind
(bodhicitta).
Actual reality chos-nyid, Skt. dharmată
According to the Greater Vehicle or Mahāyāna Buddhism, actual reality is
a synonym for emptiness (šūnyatā) or ultimate truth (paramārthasatya).
In Atiyoga literature (see Tantra), the actual reality or ultimate truth of
phenomena is contrasted with the apparent reality of phenomena (chos-can;
Skt. dharmin). The word dharma in the sense of 'knowable phenomena' or
‘things' is considered to be neutral in terms of these empty and apparent
aspects.
Aeon bskal-pa; Skt. kalpa
A period of cosmic or cyclical time comprising fourteen secondary cycles (Skt.
manvantara), each of which lasts 306,720,000 years. Each secondary cycle is said
to contain seventy-one ‘great ages’ (Skt. mahāyuga). Each of these is further
subdivided into four ages (Skt. caturyuga) of decreasing duration, known
respectively as the Perfect Age (Krtāyuga), the Third Age (Tretāyuga), the
Second Age (Dvāparayuga), and the Black or Degenerate Age (Kaliyuga). Since
these four ages represent a gradual decline in meritorious activities, special
meditative practices and spiritual antidotes are associated with each in turn.
Animal signs [lo]-rtags
The twelve animals that give their names to the successive years of the twelve-
year cycle (lo-'gros bcu-gnyis; Ch. shi-er shu xiang), as well as to the months of the
year and the hours of the day, are as follows: mouse, ox, tiger, hare, dragon,
snake, horse, sheep, monkey, bird, dog and pig.
Annual almanac lo-tho
A document produced by institutions such as the sMan-rtsis-khang of Lhasa
and Dharamsala, which integrates information derived from Indian astrology and
Chinese elemental divination to provide a practical guide and divinatory reading in
respect of the coming lunar year.
Antigods lha-ma-yin; Skt. asura
One of the six classes of living beings which in turn comprise the three higher existences
and the three inferior (lower) existences. The antigods are placed in the former
category. Their mode of activity is engendered by envy, embroiled as they are
in an incessant dispute with the gods over the possession of a magical tree.
Arhat dgra-bcom-pa
A being who has attained freedom from cyclic existence by eliminating the
propensities and dissonant mental states that give rise to the compulsive round
of death and rebirth. Arhat is interpreted to mean 'worthy one' or 'foe-
destroyer', the foe in this context being the dissonant mental states that are at
the root of our conditioned existence. The status of an arhat is the ideal goal
to which practitioners of Hinayāna Buddhism aspire, and it is contrasted with the
more elevated status of a hermit buddha and a bodhisattva - the latter being the goal
of Mahāyāna Buddhism.
Astrology skar-rtsis
See Indian astrology.
Avalokitesvara spyan-ras gzigs dbang-phyug
The embodiment of the compassionate aspect of the mind of all the buddhas,
manifesting in the form of a deity. He is revered as the patron deity of Tibet
and has many different aspects, the most popular of which are Padmapāņi,
Kharsapāni, the seated four-armed white form, and the thousand-armed
form (Mahakaruņika).
Awareness rig-pa; Skt. vidyā
The Tibetan termʻrig-pa', when used as a noun, may convey the sense of
the totality of conscious experience, intelligence or mental aptitude,
epistemology, or pure awareness. According to Atiyoga (see Tantra), the term
intrinsic or natural awareness (Tib. rang-rig) refers to the fundamental innate
mind in its natural unalloyed state of spontaneity and purity, beyond the
alternating states of motion and rest. As such, ‘intrinsic awareness' gives
the meditator access to buddha-mind itself, and it stands in direct contrast to
the fundamental ignorance that is the primary cause of rebirth in cyclic existence.
Awareness-holder rig-'dzin; Skt. vidyadhara
A retainer of spiritual knowledge. The term embraces the mundane sort, who
have mastered the eight common accomplishments associated with the world-
systems of desire and form; and the supramundane sort, who abide on the
RTD
Rin-chen gter-mdzod. Store of Precious Treasure.
111 vols. Paro: Ngodrup and Sherap Drimey,
1976.
Schuh
D. Schuh, Untersuchungen zur Geschichte der
Tibetischen Kalenderrechnung. Wiesbaden: Franz
Steiner Verlag, 1973.
Skt.
Sanskrit
T.
H. Ui et al. (eds), A Complete Catalogue of the
Tibetan Buddhist Canons. Sendai: Tohoku
University, 1934.
Tib.
Tibetan.
A pre-Buddhist religion of Tibet, considered to have been of Iranian origin,
and founded in Tibet by sTon-pa gShen-rab Mi-bo-che. The rituals and
practices of Bon appear to have been transformed over many centuries of
contact and interaction with Buddhism, but distinctive lineages, textual
traditions and terminology have nonetheless been maintained. There are
areas of Tibet, including Shangs, Kong-po, Teng-chen, rNga-ba, Khog-po
and Ja-dir, where Bon continues to be dominant at the present time.
Bon-po
An adherent of the Bon religion.
bPhyva-bon priest
A type of priest who is an exponent of Bon.
Brāhmin bram-ze
A member of the priestly class, among the four traditional classes of Indian
society, in contrast to the nobility, the merchants and the labourers.
'bri
The female of the yak (bos grunniens).
bse-stone
A type of agate.
Buddha sangs-rgyas
The first of the Three Precious Jewels, which are the foremost objects of refuge in .
Buddhism. The Sanskrit term buddhaliterally means ‘awakened’, developed
and enlightened, while its Tibetan equivalent sangs-rgyas is a combination
of sangs-pa (ʻawakened' or 'purified') and rgyas-pa (-developed”). These two
syllables therefore denote a full awakening from fundamental ignorance in the
form of the two obscurations (dvayāvarana) and a full realisation of true
knowledge, i.e. the pristine cognition of buddha-mind. A fully awakened being is
therefore one who, as a result of training the mind through the bodhisattva
paths, has finally realised the full potential for complete enlightenment
(bodhi), and has eliminated all the obscurations to true knowledge and
liberation. Buddhas are characterised according to their five fruitional aspects
of buddha-body, buddha-speech, buddha-mind, buddha-attributes (guna) and buddha-
activities (krtyakriyā). In practice, the term frequently refers to the historical
Sākyamuni Buddha.
Buddha-body sku; Skt. kāya
One of the five fruitional aspects of a buddha. The term refers not only to the
physical body of a buddha but also to the varying ‘dimensions' in which the
embodiment of fully enlightened attributes is present. As such, the buddha-
body can be categorised in different ways, corresponding to the different
levels of the teaching. For example, sūtras of the Lesser Vehicle (Hinayāna) speak
of the buddha-body of reality (dharmakāya) and the buddha-body of form (rūpakāya),
while sūtras of the Greater Vehicle (Mahāyāna) generally mention three
buddha-bodies (trikāya), dividing the latter into the buddha-body of perfect
resource (sambhogakāya) and the buddha-body of emanation (nirmāņakāya).
White Beryl
Sangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho, Baidūrya dkar-po
(English title: White Beryl Treatise). Lhasa
edition.
Xylo
Xylographic edition.



413
Glossary
Buddha-body of [actual] reality chos-sku, Skt. dharmakāya
The essence of the enlightened mind, which is uncreated (skye-med), free from
the limits of conceptual elaboration (spros-pa'i mtha'-bral), empty of inherent
existence (rang-bzhin-gyis stong-pa), inwardly radiant, beyond duality, and
spacious like the sky. It is said to be present as an uncultivated seed in
unenlightened beings, and fully developed or nurtured when buddhahood
is attained, thereby giving rise to all the other modes of buddha-body.
Buddha-body of indestructible reality rdo-rje'i sku/lus, Skt. vajrakāya
In the terminology of the rNying-ma school, this refers to the indivisible
essence of the three buddha-bodies (trikāya), i.e. the originally pure unchanging
expanse of reality (dharmadhātu) in which all paths are concluded and all
conceptual elaborations (prapañca) transcended.
Buddha-field zhings-khams; Skt. buddhakşetra
The operational fields or ‘paradises' presided over by specific buddhas, which
spontaneously arise in consequence of their altruistic aspirations. Such
environments are totally free from suffering, both physical and mental, and
they transcend the mundane god realms (devaloka) inhabited by sentient beings
of the world-systems of desire, form and formlessness.
Buddhahood sangs-rgyas nyid, Skt. buddhatva
The state of full enlightenment, which is totally free from conditioned
existences, having totally overcome all the tendencies imprinted on the mind
as a result of long association with dissonant mental states. It comprises five
fruitional aspects: buddha-body, buddha-speech, buddha-mind, buddha-attributes and
buddha-activities.
Buddha-mind thugs, Skt. citta
One of the five fruitional aspects of a buddha; synonymous with pristine cognition.
Five modes of buddha-mind are differentiated. In the distinctive terminology
of the rNying-ma school, these are known as: 1) the buddha-mind of great
non-conceptuality (mi-rtog chen-po'i thugs); 2) the buddha-mind of indivisible
indestructible reality (mi-phyed rdo-rje'i thugs); 3) the buddha-mind of great
equanimity (mnyam-nyid chen-po'i thugs); 4) the buddha-mind of manifest
enlightenment (mngon-byang-gi thugs); and 5) the buddha-mind which
liberates living beings ('gro-ba sgrol-ba'i thugs).
Buddha-speech gsung, Skt. vāk
The speech of the buddhas is said to have five aspects, in that they may
communicate through: 1) uncreated meaning (skye-med don-gi gsung);
2) enlightened intention and symbols (dgongs-pa brda'i gsung); 3) expressive
words (brjod-pa tshig-gi gsung); 4) indivisible reality (dbyer-med rdo-rje'i
gsung); and 5) the blessings of awareness (rig-pa byin-labs-kyi gsung).
Burnt offerings sbyin-sreg, Skt. homa
A ritual in which inscribed diagrams, along with diverse sacramental
substances, are burnt as offerings in the context of the four rites of pacification,
enrichment, subjugation and wrath. For the rite of pacification, the hearth
is white and round, and the sacraments include curd, milk, butter, sesame
oil and white-coloured foods. For the rite of enrichment the hearth is square
and yellow, and the sacraments include molasses, honey, sugar, curds and
yellow-coloured grains. For the rite of subjugation the hearth is semi-
circular and red, while the sacraments include flowers, sour food and
red-coloured foods. Lastly, for the rite of wrath, the hearth is triangular
and black, and the sacraments include poisons, blood, pungent substances
and black effigies.
bzhi-gshed
See Fourth-removed adversarial aspect.
(art, medicine, logic, grammar and Buddhism) and the five minor sciences
(astrology/divination, poetics, prosody, synonymics and drama).
Cloche gshang
An open, shallow bell, utilised as a religious implement by the Bon-po.
Commitment dam-tshig, Skt. samaya
Sacred pledges undertaken by practitioners of the tantras.
Compassion snying-rje/thugs-rje; Skt. karuņā
Term often used in Buddhist literature as a synonym for 'great compassion'
(mahākarunā) – the totally unbiased mind that aspires to the liberation of all
sentient beings from suffering, equally. Compassion is said to become great
only when, through proper training of the mind, such an altruistic aspiration
becomes spontaneous and no longer requires conscious effort.
Conqueror rgyal-ba; Skt. jina
In Buddhist literature, an epithet for buddha, implying that a buddha is one
who has conquered cyclic existence.
Consciousness transference 'pho-ba; Skt. samkrānti
The process which at the moment of death enables the deceased to acquire
liberation from cyclic existence during the intermediate states. If capable the deceased
will have trained in the distinctive practices of consciousness transference
during his or her lifetime, and then directly apply the technique at the time of
death. Among the signs of successful training is a minute hole at the anterior
fontanelle on the crown of the head, enabling consciousness to depart from
the central channel. It is important to recognise the signs indicative of the
onset of death as and when they arise, and to apply the ritual antidotes which
might avert these signs and postpone death. Only when such signs constantly
recur without the possibility of being averted by ritual means, and death
becomes imminent, should the dying person take recourse to the transference
of consciousness.
Constellations skar-ma; Skt. nakșatra
The twenty-eight constellations (rgyu-skar nyer-brgyad) are found in both the
Chinese and Indian traditions. Unlike the Indian tradition, which emphasises
the celestial position of the constellations, the calculations employed in
elemental divination are based on the relationships formed by the elements
(wood, earth, fire, iron or water) to which the twenty-eight constellations
correspond. Calculations based on the constellations are particularly
employed to determine the appropriate time for marriage (skar-ma'i lam-
rtsis/kham-yu).
Constitutional types rus-khams
Human beings are said to belong to five constitutional types. These are
known in Tibetan by their original transliterated Chinese terms conjoined
with the appropriate element: wood (keg-shing), fire (ji-me), earth (kung-sa),
iron (gshang-lcags) and water ('u rus-chen). In the case of a specific
constitutional type it is important for the diviner to ascertain which years
among those of the twelve-year cycle are significant, since each
constitutional type is considered to have its years of greater penalty (chad-
chen-gyi lo) and lesser penalty (chad-chung-gi lo), as well as those forming
identity-or destiny-relationships (dbang-lo), mother-relationships (ma-lo),
son-relationships (bu-lo), friend-relationships (grogs-lo) and enemy-
relationships (dgra-lo). In addition each type is recognised to have a specific
planet of destiny (dbang-gza) and a specific constellation of destiny (dbang-skar);
see Part 1 of the present work.
Crossed-vajra rdo-rje rgya-gram; Skt. viśvavajra
The symbolic hand-implement of Amoghasiddhi and other deities in the
assembly of the peaceful and wrathful deities. It is generally emblematic
of buddha-activity. See also Vajra.
Current numeric square babs-sme
The numeric square that corresponds to a subject's present age. This can be
calculated once the chart with the appropriate natal numeric square at its centre
has been determined. Once the current numeric square has been obtained, it
may then be compared to the natal numeric square for predictive purposes.
Current trigram babs-spar
The trigram corresponding to a subject's present age.
Cyclic existence 'khor-ba; Skt. samsāra
The mundane state of existence, conditioned by the imprint of past actions and
characterised by a cycle of life, death and rebirth in which the six classes of sentient
beings undergo recurring sufferings (duḥkhatā). Cyclic existence emerges from
fundamental ignorance through a process known as the twelve links of dependent
origination (dvādaśāřgapratītyasamutpāda). When fundamental ignorance,
identified as the misapprehension of the nature of actual reality, is reversed, cyclic
existence is itself reversed, and the contrasting state of nirvāṇa is attained, free
from suffering and the processes of rebirth.
comprise both higher rites (stod-las) conducive to the supreme accomplishments
of liberation and buddhahood, and lower rites (smad-las) which through
pacification, enrichment, subjugation and wrathful force bring about
protection and removal of obstacles. Among the rites of enrichment are those
which enhance the lifespan (tshe-phur) or secure one's existence in the world
(srid-phur).
Dākini mkha'-'gro-ma
One of the three roots (rtsa-ba gsum) of spiritual practice, along with the
spiritual teacher and the meditational deity. Dākinī are yogini who have attained either
mundane or supramundane spiritual accomplishments. They are said to confer
enlightened or buddha activities on the meditator, in contrast to the spiritual
teacher who confers blessings and the meditational deity who confers
accomplishments.
Days tshes-zhag
See Calendar days.
Death divinations gshin-rtsis
As explained in Part ıx of the present work, divinations may be made to
determine family members who are susceptible to an impending death, to
determine the fate of bereaved relatives, or to comprehend matters associated
with death.
Dependent origination rten-'bret, Skt. pratītyasamutpāda
The doctrine of dependent origination, as expounded in a number of
sütras, is generally considered to be the most fundamental metaphysical
view of Buddhist thought. It asserts that nothing exists independently
of other factors since things and events come into existence only by
dependence on the aggregation of multiple causes and conditions.
In general, the process of rebirth within cyclic existence originates
consequent on twelve successive links of dependent origination
(dvādaśāngapratītyasamutpāda), as follows. Fundamental ignorance gives rise
to conditioning or motivational factors (samskāra), which are stored in
the substratum consciousness of the ground-of-all (ālayavijñāna).
Following the moment of a sentient being's conception in the womb, this
inheritance of past actions from a previous life gives rise to the five psycho-
physical aggregates (pañcaskandha), which are products of that dualising
consciousness. These in turn provide the subjective and objective
framework (āyatana) for sensory activity in the initial stages of embryonic
development, giving rise to more mature sensory contact (sparśa) as an
unborn child develops a sensitivity to its environment inside the womb.
Thereafter, the successive links of sensation (vedanā), attachment (trsna),
grasping (ādāna), and the very process of rebirth (bhava), culminate in the
actual birth (jātı) of a sentient being within the living world; and this in
turn leads inevitably to old age and death (jarāmaraņa). The attainment
of nirvāņa, through which compulsive rebirth in cyclic existence is ended,
implies that these twelve links of dependent origination are reversed, and
the process of reversal forms a distinctive meditation practised by hermit
buddhas in the awesome setting of a cemetery.
Destiny element dbang-thang
One of the four aspects of elemental divination on the basis of which calculations
concerning spheres of influence, wealth, property, food, clothing and
descendants may be made in respect of a given year, month, calendar day or hour.
The destiny elements corresponding to the years of the sexagenary cycle
form thirty consecutive pairs (bu-'ded sum-cu), and it is this elemental aspect
which generally gives its name to the years of the cycle: wood tiger, wood
hare, and so forth. The destiny element of a given year may enter into an
identity-, mother-, enemy-, friend- or son-relationship consequent on the
age of a given subject.
Deva lha
See Gods.
Discriminative awareness shes-rab; Skt. prajñā
The faculty of intelligence or discriminating awareness inherent
within the mental continuum of all living creatures which enables
them to examine the characteristics of things and events, thus making
it possible to make judgements and deliberations. According to the
Abhidharma of the Lesser Vehicle, prajñā is one of the five mental factors
of ascertainment that arise during all mental events of a veridical nature.
According to the Greater Vehicle, the perfection of this faculty of
discriminative awareness (prajñāpāramitā) leads a bodhisattva to a total
overcoming of all types of scepticism and ignorance and to the realisation
of the emptiness of all things. In this context, discriminative awareness is
known as the sixth perfection, in contrast to the other five perfections
(generosity, moral discipline, patience, perseverance and meditative
concentration). When conjoined with the skilful means or compassion inherent
in these other five, the resulting integration is known as prajñopāya,
indicating that the two principal aspects of the path to enlightenment
(bodhi) are fully present.
Dissonant mental states nyon-mongs, Skt. klesa
The essentially pure nature of mind is obscured and afflicted by the various
psychological and mental defilements known as the dissonant mental states
The Tibetan equivalent of the Sanskrit kleśa implies a mental event whose
Calendar day tshes
The days of the lunar month that form the basis of the Tibetan calendar are
numbered consecutively from one to thirty, with the full moon of each month
falling on the fifteenth day. The thirty calendar days may also be calculated
according to the sequence of the twelve animal signs, the eight trigrams, the nine
numeric squares, the nine planets, the tomb-signs, or the twelve sectors of growth and
decline. In accordance with certain astronomical observations, a specific
calendar day may be omitted (chad) or doubled (lhag). The impact of the
calendar day has importance for natal horoscope as well as for divinations
concerning marriage and ill-health.
Charm gto
See Ritual charm.
Chinese divination nag-rtsis
A synonym for elemental divination ('byung-rtsis). It embraces both the ancient
system of Chinese divination (rgya-rtsis rnying-ma), based on the relationships
formed between the five elements, and the later calendrical observations
(rgya-rtsis gsar-ma) that were introduced to Tibet from the seventeenth
century onwards.
Cīvamcivaka shang-shang
A mythical creature with the head, arms and torso of a human being, and the
wings and legs of a bird.
Classical sciences rig-gnas; Skt. vidyā
The classical sciences of ancient India comprise the five major sciences
Dagger phur-ba; Skt. kila
A ritual implement held in the hands of the meditational deity Vajrakīla. It has a
pyramidal blade with three edges (representing the transformation of
delusion, attachment and aversion) and is surmounted by one or three faces,
indicative of the deity Vajrakīla. The practices associated with Vajrakīla



414
The White Beryl
on their misrepresentation of actual reality or emptiness, and through
expressing the aspiration that they all might come to realise the ultimate truth.
Esoteric instruction man-ngag, Skt. upadeśa
The esoteric orʻpith’instructions are a practical form of guidance targeted
directly at the spiritual progress of specific individuals (when used in the
Buddhist context) or diagnostic methods (when used in the medical or
divinatory context). They are considered 'esoteric' in the sense that they
have been secretly or confidentially transmitted from teacher to student.
Even-numbered signs/trigrams rva-ru
The even-numbered signs, or ‘goat-horns', corresponding to the natal years are
generally held to comprise those of the tiger, hare, bird, monkey, horse and
snake; along with the trigrams Dva, Zin and Zon. When the natal months are
calculated, the dragon, sheep, dog and ox, which represent the last-seasonal
months, are also designated as even-numbered signs.
Expanse of actual reality chos-dbyings, Skt. dharmadhātu
Synonym for the expanse of emptiness. As such, it indicates both the
dimension of the buddha-body of reality, and the pristine cognition of reality's expanse
(dharmadhātujñāna), which is one of the five aspects of buddha-mind or pristine
cognition
arisal causes psychological afflictions within the mind, thus destroying its
peace and composure. According to Abhidharma literature there are six
primary dissonant mental states fundamental ignorance, attachment, anger,
pride, doubt, and mundane views) and twenty subsidiary mental states
(wrath, malice, dissimulation, fury, envy, miserliness, dishonesty, deception,
arrogance, mischief, indecorum, indecency, obfuscation, agitation, distrust,
laziness, carelessness, forgetfulness, distraction, and inattentiveness). At the
root of all these psychological afflictions lies the fundamental ignorance that
misapprehends the true nature of reality.
Distinct attributes of the buddhas sangs-rgyas-kyi ma-'dres-pa'i chos,
Skt. astadaśāveņika buddhadharma
The eighteen distinct attributes comprise twelve negative attributes that are
absent in a buddha, and six positive attributes that are present. The former
include the absence of bewilderment, noise, false memories, meditative
distraction, diversifying perception, indifference, degenerate motivation,
degenerate perseverance, degenerate recollection, degenerate meditative
stability, degenerate discriminative awareness, and degenerate liberation. The
latter include the presence of activities of body, speech and mind, which are
preceded and followed by pristine cognition and unimpeded with respect to the
past, future or present.
Divination turtle rus-sbal
The concept of the divination turtle is to be understood on various levels.
Firstly, the divination turtle of the natural state (gnas-lugs rus-sbal) refers to
the emptiness or expanse of actual reality in which all buddhas and sentient beings are
fully present. The divination turtle of the material world (chags-pa'i rus-sbal),
comprising the five elements, emerged from the divination turtle of the
natural state, and from their contact the divination turtle of sentient
existence (srid-pa'i rus-sbal), including sentient beings of all classes and the eight
trigrams, subsequently emerged. However, it was through the divination turtle
of emanation (sprul-pa'i rus-sbal) that Manjughosa expounded the science of
elemental divination at Mt Wu Tai Shan in China. Finally, the reliquary divination
turtle (ring-srel-gyi rus-sbal), also known as the divination turtle of exegesis
(bshad-pa'i rus-sbal) or incision (bshas-pa'i rus-sbal), refers to the actual
teachings of elemental divination which Manjughosa reputedly imparted to
Brahmā, Vijaya, Nāgarāja Takşaka and Brahmāna Kapila at Mt Wu Tai Shan.
Divinatory mat gdan
Mat on which the divinatory pebbles are deployed, which should preferably be
made of clean felt. In the case of natal horoscope and divinations concerning the
living rather than the dead the mat should be white in colour, whereas in the
case of divinations concerning specific matters of death it should be black, or
else made of black sackcloth.
Divinatory pebbles rde'ulrdel
Pebbles were traditionally deployed in charts representing the diverse
relationships formed by the elements, whether in the context of natal horoscope,
or of divinations concerning marriage, obstacle years, ill-health or death. Such
pebbles include the pebbles of recognition' (ngo-bzung-gi rdel), which would
be green, red, yellow, white or blue depending on the element they had to
symbolise, and the pebbles of conclusive analysis’(gtang-gcod-kyi rdel), which
represent the actual elemental relationships: white for mother-, friend- and
identity-relationships of earth and water (which are deemed to be positive);
black for enemy-relationships and identity-relationships of fire, iron or wood
(which are considered negative); and mottled for son-relationships (which are
deemed to be neutral). In the schematic charts or grids that are employed
today, the white pebbles are represented by circles and the black pebbles by
crosses. In some complex calculations, the tally of the pebbles may leave a
remainder that do not fit within the grid. These so-called residual pebbles
(rdel-ro/rde'u ro) are then positioned in the margin, either to the left or right
of the grid.
Divinatory prognosis kha-dmar
The diverse readings or prognoses concerning natal horoscope and the
divinations of marriage, obstacle years, ill-health and death, which depend on
the tally of the divinatory pebbles, are to be found in White Beryl. Many of these
prognoses are also illustrated on the plates of the present manuscript. It
is important to remember that the readings are not deterministic but
prescriptive. If the recommended rituals are performed, the predicted
outcome can be avoided or secured.
drug-'bras
See Sixth-removed aspect.
'Dun-khur
Archaic Chinese term indicating a year whose destiny element forms an enemy-
relationship with its vitality element.
Dur-bon priest
A priest who presides over funerary rites, according to the Bon tradition.
and located in the intermediate directions of the divination turtle along with the
trigrams Khon, Khen, Gin and Zon; the ox, sheep, dog and dragon signs; Saturn
and the four intermediate constellations. Earth is described as static, and its
function is one of heaviness and solidity, inherent in a diet of bread and the
flesh of an animal’s limbs, while within the body it is represented by the
muscle tissue and the spleen. Socially, earth relates to the ruling class, to
Buddhist monks, and to maternal ancestors or matters concerning land
and houses.
Eight aggregates of consciousness rnam-shes tshogs-brgyad
The so-called ‘eight classes of consciousness' comprise: 1) the consciousness
of the ground-of-all (kun-gzhi rnam-par shes-pa), which is a non-referential
substratum consciousness underlying all the other aspects of consciousness;
2) the consciousness of deluded intelligence (nyon-mong yid-kyi rnam-par shes-
pa), which evaluates its objects in terms of refutation and proof based upon
the subject's past propensities; 3) the mental consciousness (yid-kyi rnam-par
shes-pa), which objectively refers to general concepts or thoughts; 4) the
visual consciousness (mig-gi rnam-par shes-pa), which perceives visual forms;
5) the audial consciousness (rna'i rnam-par shes-pa), which perceives sounds;
6) the olfactory consciousness (sna'i rnam-par shes-pa), which perceives
smells; 7) the gustatory consciousness (lce'i rnam-par shes-pa), which savours
tastes; and 8) the tactile consciousneess (lus-kyi rnam-par shes-pa), which
perceives physical objects.
Eight aspects of liberation rnam-thar brgyad, Skt. aştavimokşa
The eight aspects of liberation, categorising the modes of the world-systems
of form and formlessness from which all buddhas are liberated, comprise:
liberation from seeing the world-system of form as form, liberation from seeing
the world-system of formlessness as form, liberation from attachment to
the beauty of form, liberation from infinite space, liberation from infinite
consciousness, liberation from nothingness, liberation from the summit
of existence, and liberation in which all sensations have ceased.
Eight classes of spirits sde-brgyad
Diverse enumerations of these categories of spirits have been made by
gNubs-chen sangs-rgyas ye-shes. Accordingly, there is an outer eightfold
group (phyi-yi sde brgyad), an inner eightfold group (nang-gi sde brgyad), a
secret eightfold group (gsang-ba'i sde brgyad), a supreme eightfold group
(mchog-gi sde brgyad), an emanational eightfold group (sprul-pa'i sde brgyad),
and a phenomenal eightfold group (snang-srid sde brgyad).
Eight trigrams spar-kha brgyad
See Trigrams.
Eighteen sensory constituents kham bcu-brgyad
See Sensory constituents.
Elemental divination 'byung-rtsis
Also known as Chinese divination, this refers to the system of divination based
on the relationships formed between the five elements and their various
representations: animal signs, trigrams, numeric squares, planets and constellations.
It includes aspects of the Chinese mantic traditions associated with the
I Ching and also with geomancy (Ch. feng shui). When practically applied,
divinatory prognoses may be made concerning natal horoscope as well as
geomancy, marriage, obstacle years, ill-health and death.
Elements khams
See Earth element, Iron element, Fire element, Water element, Wood element.
Empowerment dbang-bskur, Skt. abhisekha
A ritual ceremony performed by spiritual teachers and lineage-holders, the function
of which is to empower prospective trainees, enabling them to practice the
tantras. The ritual processes of the empowerment ceremony are intended to
activate the potentials inherent within the body, speech and mind of the
trainee, thus making him or her eligible to engage in the specific practices of
tantra. Such an empowerment ceremony is therefore an essential prerequisite
for the practice of tantra in the Buddhist tradition. It is important to note that
the aspects of empowerment will vary, depending on whichever of the six
tantra vehicles the trainee is about to enter. In the context of the present work,
the prescribed rituals frequently include the long-life empowerment (tshe-
dbang) associated with the meditational deity Amitāyus.
Emptiness stong-pa-nyid, Skt. śūnyatā
In all Buddhist philosophical systems from Madhyamaka onwards, ‘emptiness'
refers to the lack of inherent existence with respect to both mind and
external phenomena. Its synonyms, therefore, include ultimate truth (Skt.
paramārthasatya), actual reality, and suchness (Skt. tathatā). When all levels of
conceptual awareness dissolve and the relationship between subject and
object is correctly recognised, the natural, non-dual dynamic space, which
is regarded as the true nature of mind and external phenomena, is revealed.
Enlightened mind byang-chub sems; Skt. bodhicitta
Term referring to the altruistic aspiration to attain full enlightenment
(Skt. bodhi) for the benefit of all beings. There are two ways in which such
an attitude may be developed: relatively through cultivation of the four
immeasurable aspirations (loving kindness [maitri], compassion [karuņā],
sympathetic joy [muditā] and equanimity [upekṣā]), and ultimately through
the understanding that all sentient beings who have been one's parents over
a succession of past lives are bewildered and endure suffering consequent
Feast-offering tshogs-kyi 'khor-lo, Skt. gaṇacakra
In general, feast-offerings are held to commemorate important events in the
Buddhist calendar; examples include the tenth day feast-offering dedicated
to Padmasambhava. Feast-offerings are indispensable to the practice of the
tantras on account of their unique methods for conferring accomplishment and
pacifying obstacles. Klong-chen rab-byams-pa (GGFTC, pp. 922–926)
indicates that the expression refers to a ceremony in which fortunate yogins
and yoginīs participate together; to the outer, inner and secret sacraments of
the ritual, which are offered and consumed during the feast; or to the mandalas
of buddha-body and buddha-mind, whether actual or visualised, who receive the
offerings and bring the ritual to its successful conclusion.
Fifth-removed harmonious aspect Inga-mthun
In natal horoscope, the fifth animal year-sign counting backwards or forwards from
the sign of the subject's birth, which is deemed to be auspicious.
Fire element me
The fire element is symbolised by a red triangular flame, numerically
represented by the number four, and located in the south of the divination turtle,
along with the trigram Li, the horse and snake signs, the Sun and the six
southern constellations. Fire is described as flickering or blazing, and its
function is one of combustion, inherent in a diet of cooked meat, blood and
the flesh of an animal's head, while within the body it is represented by the
metabolism and the heart. Socially, fire relates to the mercantile class,
to women and to children, or mothers with daughters.
Five bodhisattva paths lam-Inga
Five successive paths are traversed by all practitioners of the three causal
vehicles (i.e. those of the pious attendants (śrāvaka], the hermit buddhas and
the bodhisattvas). The following sequence is common to all three types of
practitioner: 1) On the path of accumulation (sambhāramārga), one cultivates
the four foundations of mindfulness (body, feeling, mind and phenomena),
the four correct trainings (non-development of non-virtuous actions which
have not arisen, renunciation of non-virtuous actions which have arisen,
development of virtuous actions which have not arisen, and non-renunciation
of virtuous actions which have arisen), and the four supports for miraculous
ability (aspiration, mind, perseverance and scrutiny- each imbued with
renunciation). 2) On the path of connection (prayogamārga), one cultivates
the five faculties and powers (faith, perseverance, recollection, meditative
stability and discriminative awareness). 3) On the path of insight
(darśanamārga), one cultivates the seven aspects of genuine enlightenment
(recollection, analysis of the sacred doctrine, perseverance, delight, physical
refinement, meditative stability and equanimity). 4) On the path of
meditation (bhāvanāmārga), one meditates on the eight aspects of the sublime
path (correct view, thought, speech, goal of activity, livelihood, effort,
recollection and meditative stability). 5) On the path of no-more-learning
(aśaiksamārga), one attains nirvāṇa as an arhat.
Five major sciences rig-gnas chen-po Inga
See Classical sciences.
Five minor sciences rig-gnas chung-ba Inga
See Classical sciences.
Five vital energies rlung Inga
See Vital energy.
Following sixth-removed sign/aspect mar-gyi drug-'bras
When divinations concerning obstacle years are carried out according to the
gSer-lo-can, gYu-lo-can or Dung-lo-can methods, the calculation of the sixth
year-sign counting forwards from the present year is considered to be
important. (See Part vi of the present work.)
Four classes of tantra rgyud-sde bzhi
Refers to the four successive vehicles of the tantras, namely Kriyātantra,
C
Earth element sa
One of the five elements according to the system of elemental divination. Earth is
symbolised by a yellow square, numerically represented by the number two,



415
Glossary
Ubhayatantra, Yogatantra and Unsurpassed Yogatantra
(Anuttarayogatantra), the last of which, from the rNying-ma point of view,
includes the vehicles of Mahāyoga, Anuyoga and Atiyoga.
Four continents gling bzhi, Skt. caturdvīpa
According to traditional Indian Buddhist cosmology, the world has
Mt Sumeru as its central axis, surrounded by seven concentric oceans, which
are endowed with all the qualities of pure water and are divided from one
another by seven successive golden mountain ranges. The entire world is
girded by a perimeter of iron mountains known as the Cakravāla. In each of
the four cardinal directions of Mt Sumeru is located a continent, along with
two satellites or subcontinents. The eastern continent, Viratdeha (lus-'phags;
‘sublime in body'), is semi-circular, the lifespan of its inhabitants is 250 years,
and it has two subcontinents: Deha (lus) and Videha (lus-'phags). The southern
continent, Jambudvīpa ('dzam-bu gling, ‘rose-apple continent'), is triangular,
and the lifespan of its inhabitants ranges from infinity to ten years in the
course of an aeon. Its two subcontinents are Cāmara (rnga-yab) and
Aparacāmara (rnga-yab gzhan). The western continent, Aparagodānīya (ba-
lang spyod; 'rich in cattle”), is circular, the lifespan of its inhabitants is 500
years, and its two subcontinents are śāthā (gYo-ldan) and Uttaramantriņa
(lam-mchog 'gro). The northern continent, Uttarakuru (sgra-mi-snyan;
‘unpleasant sound”), is square, the lifespan of its inhabitants is one thousand
years, and its two subcontinents are Kurava (sgra mi-snyan) and Kaurava
(sgra mi-snyan-gyi zla).
Four hundred and four diseases nad bzhi-brgya rtsa bzhi
A traditional pathological classification, comprising 101 diseases associated
with an imbalance of wind or vital energy, 101 diseases associated with an
imbalance of phlegm, 101 diseases associated with an imbalance of bile,
and 101 diseases associated with an imbalance of all three humours in
conjunction.
Four primary hidden points of divination gab-rtse bzhi
The following four aspects form the basis upon which all divination
techniques are implemented: 1) the discrete elements, which are determined
according to their external, internal and secret classifications; 2) the sense-
objects, which convey these elements to the senses; 3) the intellect, which
analyses the mutual relationships between the elements and sense objects;
and 4) the mind, which grasps the negative and positive attributes of such
relationships.
Four truths bden-pa bzhi, Skt. caturāryasatya
The 'four sublime truths', expounded by Śākyamuni Buddha in the context
of the first turning of the wheel of the sacred doctrine, comprise: 1) the truth
of suffering (duḥkhasatya), which permeates all cyclic existence; 2) the truth of
the cause of suffering (samudayasatya), identified as fundamental ignorance arising
through the twelve links of dependent origination; 3) the truth of the cessation
of suffering (nirodhasatya) consequent on the attainment of nirvāṇa; and 4) the
truth of the path leading to the cessation of suffering (Mārgasatya), which has
eight aspects: correct view, correct thought, correct speech, correct goal of
activity, correct livelihood, correct effort, correct mindfulness and correct
meditative stability.
Fourth-removed adversarial aspect bzhi-gshed
An inauspicious calculation made when divinations concerning obstacle years
are carried out according to the gSer-lo-can, gYu-lo-can or Dung-lo-can
methods. It entails calculating the fourth-removed year-sign counting forwards
or backwards from the present year. A similar calculation is also made in
divinations concerning timely and untimely death, counting four places
forwards or backwards from the year in which a death occurs.
Fundamental ignorance ma-rig-pa; Skt. avidyā
Fundamental ignorance is classed among the six primary dissonant mental states,
but is uniquely regarded as the source of all dissonant mental states and the
source of the twelve links of dependent origination, which give rise to cyclic existence.
now refers specifically to a series of nine permutational charts utilised for
determining marital compatibility.
Goddesses of the Snow Ranges brtan-ma
An important class of twelve indigenous Tibetan spirits who personify the
mighty snow ranges of Tibet and who are incorporated within the outer
retinue (phyi-'khor) of the fifty-eight wrathful deities. Foremost among them
are Kong-btsun de-mo (associated with Mt Namchak Barwa),rMa-chen spom-
ra (associated with Mt Amnye Machen),rDo-rje spyan-gcig-ma (associated
with Mt Everest),rDo-rje kun-grags-ma (associated with Mt Nyenchen
Tanglha) and rDo-rje kun-ti bzang (associated with Mt Nojin Gangzang).
Gods Tha; Skt. deval sura
One of the six classes of living beings ('gro-ba rigs drug), which in turn comprise the
three higher existences (mtho-ris gsum) and the three inferior existences (ngan-song
gsum). The gods are placed in the former category, and their mode of activity
is engendered by pride, enticed as they are by their excellent attributes and
longevity. The god realms include those of the six classes of divinity inhabiting
the world-system of desire (kāmadhātu) and those of the seventeen classes of
divinity inhabiting the world-system of form (rūpadhātu), along with the four
formless meditative absorptions of the world-system of formlessness
(ārūpyadhātu).
Good-luck charm gto
See Ritual charm.
Greater Vehicle theg-pa chen-po
See Mahāyāna Buddhism.
gShen-rab [Mi-bo-che]
Founder of the Bon religion in Tibet.
gter-ma tradition
See Treasure.
gtor-ma Skt. naivedya/bali
Cakes, usually made of dough and often decorated with colourful butter
sculptures. Sometimes they are embodiments of the meditational deities
associated with particular ritual practices, or they may be food offerings
presented to various deities or protectors visualised in the context of
meditation. Alternatively, gtor-ma may act as physical symbols into which
diverse aspects of negativity are absorbed, transformed and ejected through
ritual practices.
gtsug-lag
Designates the corpus of literature associated with elemental divination and other
related aspects of the classical sciences.
Homa sbyin-sreg
See Burnt offerings.
Hours of the day dus-tshod
The twelve hours of the calendar day, each of which corresponds to two hours
of solar time, are generally designated as daybreak (gnam-lang), sunrise (nyi-
shar), mid-morning (nyi-'dros), noon (nyin-phyed), afternoon (phyed-yol), late
afternoon (nyin-myur), sunset (nyi-nub), twilight (sa-srod), late evening (srod-
'khor), midnight (gnam-phyed), after midnight (gnam-yol) and dawn (tho-rangs).
However, the twelve hours may also be named sequentially after the twelve
animals, the eight trigrams, the nine numeric squares or the twelve sectors of
growth and decline.
Hundred-syllable mantra yig-brgya
The hundred-syllable mantra of Vajrasattva may be literally translated as
follows: ‘om (excellent eulogy)! Vajrasattva! Protect my commitments!
Vajrasattva! Stabilise them! Let me be steadfast! Let me be satisfied! Let me
be nourished! Let me be loved! Bestow all accomplishments upon me! With
regard to all my past actions, make my mind virtuous! HŪM (seed-syllable
of buddha-mind)! ha (four immeasurables)! Ha (four empowerments)! Ha (four
delights)! Ha (four buddha-bodies)! Hoị (joyous laughter)! Transcendent One!
Indestructible Reality of all the Tathāgatas! Do not forsake me! Make me into
indestructible reality!Great Being of Commitment! Āụ (non-dual union).'
The recitation of this mantra, in conjunction with the visualisation of
Vajrasattva and the confession of negativity, is included among the
preliminary practices (sngon-'gro) of meditation, where its specific objective
is the purification of hatred and aversion.
Haunting spirits btsan
A class of armour-clad spirits who cause colic and intestinal disorders. They
are generally depicted as red in colour, brandishing a red lance with a red flag
in the right hand and throwing a red-coloured snare (btsan-zhags) with the
left hand, while riding a red horse.
Heart-orb śrīvatsa
One of the thirty-two designated major marks characterising the buddha-body
of emanation. In the context of the present work, the heart-orb symbol
appears at the centre of the auspicious trigram formation known as Growth
through Glory (dpal-bskyed).
Hells dmyal-ba; Skt. naraka
The eighteen hells, in which sentient beings may be born through a
preponderance of aversion, include the eight hot hells, the eight cold hells,
the neighbouring hells and the ephemeral hells.
Hermit buddha rang sangs-rgyas, Skt. pratyekabuddha
A being who has attained liberation without relying on a spiritual teacher. The
hermit buddha maintains a renunciate discipline, living either in solitary
isolation or in small monastic groups. He follows a natural meditative
predisposition, through which the twelve links of dependent origination are
reversed, thereby putting an end to rebirth in cyclic existence.
Hidden point gab-tshe
See Four primary hidden points of divination.
Higher existences gnas mtho-ris; Skt. trisvarga
The three higher realms inhabited by sentient beings, namely those of the gods,
antigods and humans.
Hinayāna Buddhism theg-dman
A basic distinction is made between the teachings of the Lesser Vehicle
(Hīnayāna) and those of the Greater Vehicle (Mahāyāna). The adherents of the
Lesser Vehicle maintain the monastic vows and ethics of the Vinaya, the didactic
teachings of the sūtras representing the first turning of the wheel of the sacred
doctrine, and the phenomenological analysis of the Abhidharma. Through
the meditative practices of calm abiding and higher insight, they eventually
attain the status of an arhat, who has gone beyond rebirth within cyclic existence.
Those who follow this tradition include pious attendants (Skt. śrāvaka) and
hermit buddhas; both are naturally inclined to seek merely their own individual
liberation from cyclic existence (in contrast to bodhisattvas, who are primarily
motivated by concern for the welfare of others).
III-health divinations nad-rtsis
There are seven great divination techniques concerning the diagnosis of
ill-health, all of which are considered to have been Chinese in origin. See
Part vil of the present work.
Imprecatory female spirits ma-mo; Skt. mātaraḥ
Female spirits who invoke curses and imprecations, inflicting plague (dal-
yams) on living beings. They are generally depicted as ugly, ferocious, dark-
complexioned and half-naked, with emaciated breasts and matted hair.
The imprecatory female spirits were subdued by Padmasambhava on
Mt Chu-bo-ri.
Inauspicious years ngan-lo
Various categories of inauspicious year are recognised, particularly in the
context of natal horoscope and divinations concerning marital compatibility and
obstacle years. These are enumerated in Parts 1 and iv of the present work.
Indestructible reality rdo-rje; Skt. vajra
The fully enlightened buddha-body, buddha-speech and buddha-mind are described
as ‘indestructible reality'. This suggests that the fruitional attributes of
buddhahood are invulnerable to physical, verbal and mental defilement, and are
naturally and perfectly indivisible from the subtle energies that constitute
the exalted body of a buddha. In the context of meditation, the buddha-body, -
speech and -mind are visualised as seed-syllables in their respective symbolic
forms om, Āụ and HŪM, which respectively mark the crown, throat and heart
centres of the meditational deity.
Indian astrology skar-rtsis
System of practical astrology derived from the Abridged Tantra of the Wheel
of Time (Laghukālacakratantra), in which calculations are made concerning
exact planetary positions (gza'-dag), calendar dates (tshes-grangs), lunar
constellations (zla-skar), the conjunctions of the lunar constellations with
the exact solar position (sbyor-ba) and the so-called eleven successive
functionaries of the planets (snga-phyi byed-pa bcu-gcig).
Inferior/lower existences ngan-song, Skt. tridurgati
Refers to the three lower existences among the realms inhabited by the
six classes of living beings ('gro-ba rigs drug), namely those of the animals, the
tormented spirits and the eighteen hells.
Intermediate states bar-do; Skt. antarābhava
The key transitional phases of cyclic existence, each of which has its own diverse
experiences and meditative antidotes. Six intermediate states are distinctly
recognised: the intermediate state of living (rang-bzhin bar-do), the
intermediate state of meditative concentration (bsam-gtan bar-do), the
intermediate state of dreams (rmi-lam bar-do), the intermediate state of the
time of death ('chi-kha'i bar-do), the intermediate state of actual reality (chos-
nyid bar-do) when the peaceful and wrathful deities manifest themselves, and
the intermediate state of rebirth (srid-pa'i bar-do). During each of these phases
the consciousness of a sentient being is said to undergo an experiential
transition, and corresponding to these experiences there are specific
meditative techniques conducive to liberation from cyclic existence.
Iron element Icags
Iron, generally translated from Chinese sources as ‘metal, is one of the five
elements according to the system of elemental divination. The iron element is
symbolised by a white semi-circle or blade, numerically represented by the
number five, and located in the west of the divination turtle, along with the trigram
Garuda khyung
A mythological bird normally depicted with a sharp owl-like beak, often
holding a snake, and with large and powerful wings. In Buddhism, the garuda
is associated with Vajrapāņi and certain wrathful forms of Padmasambhava
through its power to subdue snakes, serpentine water spirits and subterranean
creatures.
gab-tshe charts gab-tshe
See Four primary hidden points of divination.
Geomancy sa-dpyad
The aspect of elemental divination concerning the construction and layout of
buildings, which is based primarily on the comprehension of the relative
positions of the yearly, monthly, daily and hourly spirit lords of the soil (sa-bdag).
Geomantic spirit lords of the soil sa-bdag
See Spirit lords of the soil.
gi-gong
An ancient Chinese term, transcribed in Tibetan, which originally appears to
have been a synonym for marriage divination (Tib. bag-rtsis) in general, and which



416
The White Beryl
Dva, the bird and monkey signs, Venus and the six western constellations. Iron
is described as sharp-edged, its function being one of sharpness or incision,
inherent in a diet of dairy products and flesh from an animal's ribs, while
within the body it is represented by the bone tissue and the lungs. Socially,
iron relates to outcasts, children, maternal relatives and protector deities.
Irregularly numbered signs/trigrams 'chol-bu
When the natal months are calculated, the hare, horse, bird and mouse, which
represent the mid-seasonal months, are designated as irregularly numbered
signs. Also, according to the Mottled Turtle (Rus-sbal khra-mo) tradition, and
the Gathering of All Precious Elements ('Byung-ba rin-chen kun-'dus), Zin is
considered to be an irregularly numbered trigram.
'ju-thig cord
A popular method of divination practised within the Bon tradition.
kha-ral
An archaic Chinese term, transcribed in Tibetan, indicating a year whose
destiny element forms a friend-relationship with its vitality element.
kha-yan
An archaic Chinese term, transcribed in Tibetan, indicating a year whose
destiny element forms an identity-relationship with its vitality element.
kham-yu divination
A technique for ascertaining the auspicious and inauspicious days for the
bride's departure from the family home, in which the twenty-eight constellations
are subdivided into two charts (one for the groom and one for the bride).
khong-nong
An archaic Chinese term, transcribed in Tibetan, indicating a year whose
destiny element forms a mother-relationship with its vitality element.
kīla phur-ba
See Dagger.
King spirits rgyal-po
A class of male spirits, who are said to have assumed their particular forms
through a preponderance of anger and hatred. Their many mundane forms
are to be differentiated from the five supramundane forms of the protector
deity Pehar (rgyal-po sku Inga), which are respectively known as the kings of
body, speech, mind, attributes and activities.
examined by following its course throughout the thirty days of the lunar cycle,
or by examining the “pulse of the lifespan principle’ which is located at the
ulnar edge of the wrist, or indeed by examining the relationship between the
lifespan principle and the exhalation of breath. Certain rituals attract or
secure the lifespan principle (tshe-gugs) within the body, while empowerments
associated with the deity Amitāyus are designed to enhance the lifespan and
promote longevity (tshe-dbang).
Life-supporting talisman bla-gnas
Internally, refers to the seminal points (thig-le) or subtle generative
fluids within the body that support or sustain the life-essence in its cycle
through the monthly course of the lifespan principle. Externally, refers to
a sacred object, a semi-divine animal or a sacred power place imbued with
the ability to protect a given individual – frequently a king or potentate, or
even a nation state. For example, Lake Ya-'brog gYu-mtsho on the borders
of dBus and gTsang provinces is considered to be the life-supporting
talisman of Tibet.
Lineage brgyud-pa; Skt. paramparā
Refers to an unbroken line of successive teachers through whom the Buddhist,
medical or divinatory teachings are transmitted. Three primary types of
spiritual lineage have been identified: 1) the intentional lineage of the conquerors,
through which the buddha-body of actual reality telepathically communicates the
teachings to the buddha-body of perfect resource; 2) the symbolic lineage of the
awareness-holders, through which non-human and human awareness-holders of
the highest spiritual accomplishments symbolically transmit the teachings to
bodhisattvas of the tenth level; 3) the aural lineage of authoritative personages
(gang-zag snyan-khung-gi brgyud-pa), through which accomplished masters orally
transmit the teachings from one generation to the next.
Lineage-holder brgyud-pa'i 'dzin-pa; Skt. paramparādhara
One who maintains a Buddhist, medical or divinatory lineage and takes
responsibility for its continued transmission from one generation to the next.
Inga-mthun
See Fifth-removed harmonious aspect.
log-men
An'inverse' method for calculating the years of the sexagenary cycle, in contrast
to the 'standard (dkyus-ma) method of consecutive numbering that commences
from the wood mouse year and concludes with that of the water pig. The log-
menyear of a given individual will vary from one standard’year of the
sexagenary cycle to the next as it depends on the person's age. A male subject
determines his current log-men aspect by identifying which of the five elements
forms a son-relationship with his destiny element, and then counting forwards
from the tiger until reaching his current age. A female subject determines her
log-men aspect by identifying which of the five elements forms a mother-
relationship with her destiny element, and then counting backwards from the
monkey until reaching her current age. Diverse portents are associated with
certain male and female log-men year-signs, including the 'heavenly gate' (gnam-
sgo), the earthly gate' (sa-sgo), the 'five calamities' (phung-gyod lnga), the 'five
separations' (bye-bral lnga), the five lineage interruptions' (rus-chod lnga) and
the ‘five acquisitions' ('byor-pa lnga). In addition, ifone counts backwards from
the log-men for five year-signs, one arrives at the heavenly lifeline' aspect
(gnam-gyi 'ju-thag) through which the vitality elemental aspect of the log-menis
secured. If one counts forward from the log-men for five year-signs, one arrives
at the ‘earthly peg’aspect (sa-yi rten-phur) through which the body elemental
aspect of the log-menis secured. Ifone counts backwards from the log-men for
eight year-signs, one arrives at the heavenly extension'aspect (gnam-
brgyangs) through which the destiny elemental aspect of the log-menis secured;
and ifone counts forwards from the log-men for eight year-signs, one arrives at
the earthly extension' aspect (sa-brgyangs) through which the luck elemental
aspect of the log-menis secured. Finally the log-men also determines the
negative influences known as the cutting influence of demons' (bdud-chad) and
the “roaming of the life-spirit (bla-íkhyams).
Longevity tshe-ring
Long life may be enhanced by the performance of longevity rituals (tshe-chog)
associated with the deity Amitāyus, or long-life empowerments (tshe-dbang),
as well as by the recitation of the Sūtra of Amitāyus (tshe-mdo). All such
practices, including the manufacturing and consumption of long-life pills
(tshe-ril) may result in the attainment of longevity (tshe-sgrub).
Luck element klung-rta
One of the four aspects of elemental divination on the basis of which calculations
concerning good fortune and good reputation may be made in respect of a
given year, month, calendar day or hour. The luck element is determined by
combining the animal sign corresponding to the numeric square of the subject's
vitality element with a specific element. The calculation of the luck element is
important for the predictions of natal horoscope.
meaning the Middle Way' between the extremes of eternalism and nihilism
as expounded by Sākyamuni Buddha. Within the context of the Madhyamaka
school, the Middle Way refers to the doctrine of emptiness, which is held to be
the true nature of all things. According to this view, no phenomena, whether
mental or physical, can be found to possess any independent or self-validating
nature, and their existence and identity are regarded as valid only within a
relative framework of worldly convention. Founded by Nāgārjuna in the
second century AD, the Madhyamaka school was later classified into two
subdivisions, based on different interpretations of Nāgārjuna's views as made
by Buddhapalita and Bhāvaviveka, namely: the Prāsangika, who utilise only
consequential reasoning (prasanga), and the Svātantrika, who utilise
independent syllogisms (svatantra).
Mahākāla mgon-po nag-po
Supramundane and wrathful protector deity, considered to have seventy-two
or seventy-five distinct forms. The most important are: Six-armed Mahākāla
(Sadbhuja-mahākāla), Four-armed Mahākāla (Caturbhuja-mahākāla),
Pañjaranātha (mgon-po gur), Vyagravāhana Mahākāla (mgon-po stag-zhon),
Bhagavān Mahākāla (mgon-po legs-ldan), Raudrāntaka Mahākāla (mgon-po
trak-sad) and Black-cloaked Mahākāla (dgon-po ber-nag-can).
Mahāyāna Buddhism theg-pa chen-po
A basic distinction is made between the teachings of the Lesser Vehicle
(Hīnayāna) and those of the Greater Vehicle (Mahāyāna). Philosophically,
the Greater Vehicle is the system of Buddhism conducive to complete
liberation from the various dissonant mental states and misconceptions concerning
phenomenal existence, while the Lesser Vehicle is not conducive to a full
appreciation of emptiness. In terms of motivation, the practitioner of the
Greater Vehicle emphasises altruism and has the liberation of all others as the
principal objective, while the practitioner of the Lesser Vehicle emphasises
the individual's own freedom from cyclic existence as the primary motivation and
goal. As the term “Greater Vehicle’ implies, the path followed by bodhisattvas
is analogous to a large carriage, which can transport a vast number of people
to liberation, as compared to a smaller vehicle for the individual practitioner.
According to the Greater Vehicle, the entire path towards the attainment of
buddhahood is presented within the framework of two main systems or vehicles:
those of the sūtras and the tantras. The former, also known as the vehicle of
bodhisattvas, entails a causal progression from fundamental ignorance to
enlightenment which takes place over an immeasurable number of lifetimes
and which comes about through a rational, intellectual and systematic
approach to mind training, based on the stable foundation of moral discipline
and the fully developed single-pointedness of calm abiding. The latter, also
known as the vehicle of indestructible reality or the vehicle of secret mantras,
maintains the three continua of ground, path and result, through which
fundamental ignorance is seen to be atemporally pure and removed by
specific practices which then reveal the fully manifest fruitional aspects of
buddhahood.
Malevolent forces bdud
Term referring both to the archetypal malevolent force (Skt. māra), which
by projecting images of desire and terror attempted to impede the spiritual
progress of Śākyamuni Buddha to enlightenment at Vajrāsana in India; and
to malevolent forces in general, of which four types (Skt. caturmāra) are
recognised in classical Indian sources: 1) the impure psycho-physical
aggregates (skandha) which are the product of an individuals own dissonant
mental states and negativity; 2) the dissonant mental states that dominate the
mind and cause it harm; 3) deva's son (devaputra), who provokes sensual
desires and temptations; and 4) the lord of death (mrtyupati), who brings
ordinary death without choice, as a consequence of an individual's own
past actions. More generally, within the Tibetan tradition, there are frequent
references to the occurrence of obstacles due to the presence of malevolent
forces (bdud-dang 'dre'i bar-chad) – both in Tibetan medical literature, where
certain illnesses are described as being “demonically caused', and in the tantras,
where specific rituals to overcome them are prescribed. Although these
forces are often described in animistic terms, in a Buddhist context they are
regarded as subtle physiological and psychological forces that obstruct the
well-being of the individual.
Mandala dkyil-'khor
The Sanskrit ‘mandala' conveys a number of basic meanings: circle, wheel,
circumference, totality and assembly. In the context of Anuyoga and Atiyoga
(see Tantra) the expression three mandalas' specifically refers to the scope of
buddha-body, buddha-speech and buddha-mind. In a more general usage, the term
indicates the central (dkyil) and peripheral ('khor) meditational deities
described in the tantra-texts. These deities reside within a celestial palace
(vimāņa), which has a perfectly symmetrical design. The mandala thus
represents a perfected state of being, and the deities within it symbolise
the perfected states of the meditator's own psycho-physical aggregates,
elemental properties, and so forth. When such mandalas are represented
symbolically they may take the form of a two-dimensional image on painted
cloth, or they may be made of coloured sand, or else constructed as a three-
dimensional structure, carved from wood or other materials. The
visualisation of mandalas in their three-dimensional form plays a crucial role
Lake-dwelling medicinal spirits mtsho-sman/'tsho-sman
A group of five, seven or nine female spirits of the sman-mo class, who dwell
in lakes, and who are differentiated from the sky-dwelling medicinal spirits
(nam-mkha'i sman-mo), the earth-dwelling medicinal spirits (sa'i sman-mo) and
the hybrid serpentine-medicinal spirits (klu-sman). In general, the sman-mo
are a category of indigenous Tibetan spirits, to whom medicinal gtor-maofferings
are made in order to appease their inclination to bewitch the minds of females
who stray into remote locales. The medicinal spirits are said to have been
bound under an oath of allegiance by Padmasambhava at gSil-ma in gTsang.
Lesser Vehicle theg-dman
See Hinayāna Buddhism.
Liberation grol-ba/sgrol-ba; Skt. moksa
In a general Buddhist context, refers to freedom from the two obscurations
that give rise to the sufferings associated with rebirth in cyclic existence. These are
1) the dissonant mental states, headed by delusion, attachment, aversion, pride and
envy, which are the basis of the mistaken belief in self-identity, and 2) the
misrepresentation of the nature of phenomena, through which the emptiness
of the subject and object of perception is obscured. It is a characteristic of all
the vehicles of Buddhism that they are endowed with the means of liberating
sentient beings from rebirth in cyclic existence through their meditative and
purificatory techniques as expounded in the sūtra and tantra texts.
Life-essence bla
The vital spirit of sentient existence. It is said to circulate in the human body
over the thirty days of the lunar cycle, starting on the first day from the first
joint of the left big toe in males and from the first joint of the right big toe in
females. A perceptive physician should take into account the rise and fall of
the life-essence through the lunar cycle, which is also known as the course
of the lifespan principle (tshe-rtsa).
Lifelong companion gods 'go-ba'i ha
A category of spirits who protect the life-essence of an individual,
accompanying the individual in question for the duration of his or her life,
in the manner in which a shadow follows the body. Five types of lifelong
companion god are specifically identified: the gods of vitality (srog-gi-lha),
the gods of masculinity (pho-lha), the gods of femininity (mo-lha), the gods
of the countryside (yul-lha) and the gods of inimical force (dgra-lha).
Lifespan tshe
The duration of life determined on the basis of one's past actions. The
presence or absence of the lifespan principle within the body may be
M
Madhyamaka dbu-ma
The most influential among the four classical schools of Indian Buddhist
philosophy; derived from the Sanskrit expression madhyamapratipad,



417
Glossary
blessings and the dākinī who confers enlightened activities. After receiving
empowerment and guidance concerning an appropriate meditational deity
from an authoritative spiritual teacher, the practitioner of the tantras then
seeks to experientially cultivate union with that deity through the generation
stage of meditation. They assume diverse forms, corresponding to the
different classes of tantra. However, it is essential that the meditational deity
should not be perceived as an externally existing or independent being but
rather as a form or resonance of buddha-mind itself.
Months zla-ba
The twelve months (zla-ba bcu-gnyis) of the lunar year are generally named
according to the seasons of the year, as follows: first spring month, mid-
spring month, last spring month, first summer month, mid-summer month,
last summer month, first autumn month, mid-autumn month, last autumn
month, first winter month, mid-winter month, and last winter month,
However, the same months may also be named sequentially after the twelve
animal signs (starting with the tiger), after the numbered months of the lunar
year (starting with the eleventh), or after the twelve sectors of growth and decline.
The calculations pertaining to the natal month (skyes-zla) and the trigram
indicative of the natal month (skyes-zla spar-kha) are important for natal
horoscope and the calculation of the nuptial months for giving away a bride
(zla-ba'i rdzong-lugs).
Mountain or sylvan spirit gnod-sbyin
A class of spirits of Indian origin who assume both male (Skt. yakşa) and
female (Skt. yakșinī) forms. Frequently depicted as holding choppers, cleavers
and swords, they are said to inhabit mountainous areas and sylvan groves,
and if propitiated in the context of a means for attainment (Skt. sādhana) they may
confer the common accomplishment of swift-footedness. The Tibetan equivalent
gnod-sbyin literally means 'granting harm'.
Multiples of (number] nine dgu-mig
When a given element coincides with a multiple of nine, diverse portents are
suggested, particularly when calculations are made concerning obstacle years.
In natal horoscope, too, there are specific portents for households in which
childbirth coincides with multiples of nine (skyes-mtshang gnad-kyi mig). The
multiples of nine may be calculated on the basis of a solitary sign (rkyang),
combined signs (sbrags), trigrams, numeric squares or constitutional types.
in the generation stage of meditation; however, these ‘abodes of the deity'
are never perceived of as independently existing universes but rather as
manifestations of the enlightened mind of the principal meditational deity being
meditated upon.
Mandala of offerings mchod-pa'i mandal
One of the preliminary practices (sngon-'gro) specifically designed to act as an
antidote to the dissonant mental state of desire or attachment, and to accelerate the
accumulation of merit (Skt. punyasambhāra). In general, there are outer, inner
and secret mandala offerings, corresponding to the three buddha-bodies of
emanation, perfect resource and actual reality.
Mantra sngags
The essence of buddha-speech, abiding within the subtle body of the meditator
in the form of seed-syllables'. The seed-syllables give rise to the visualised
celestial palace and mandala of any designated meditational deity, and may be
vocalised in order to generate the appropriate visualisation, to consecrate an
already generated visualisation, or to enact consequent rites of enlightened
activity. According to the tantras, mundane body, speech and mind are
transformed into buddha-body, -speech and-mind, respectively by the hand
gestures (or seals) of buddha-body, the mantra recitations of buddha-speech,
and the visualisations of buddha-mind. Mantras generally take the form of an
initial seed-syllable (such as ‘om'), followed by a Sanskrit or hybrid-Sanskrit
formula, and a final seed-syllable (such as ‘HŪM'). Three main types are
differentiated: retentive mantras (Skt. dhāraṇī, Tib.gzungs-sngags), gnostic
mantras (Skt. vidyāmantra; Tib. rigs-sngags), and secret mantras (Skt.
guhyamantra; Tib. gsang-sngags). The first are associated with the sūtras and
designed to intensify discriminative awareness; the second are associated with
specific deities of the outer tantras and designed to intensify skilful means; while
the third are associated with the inner tantras and designed to intensify the
generation stage of meditation. The term 'secret mantra' is also utilised as a
synonym for tantra. Literally speaking, ‘mantra' (an abbreviation of the
Sanskrit mana and tara) is glossed as a 'device for protecting the mind', since
the recitation of mantras protects the mind from the overwhelming influence
of ordinary perceptions and conceptions which give rise to deluded states of
existence and thus inhibit the full expression of buddha nature.
Mantrin sngags-pa
An adept of the mantras in general. However, the word sngags-pa is popularly
used to denote those practitioners of tantra who choose to maintain a family life
in contrast to the celibate life of a monk or a nun.
Māra bdud
See Malevolent forces.
Marriage divinations bag-rtsis
Divinations concerning marital prospects (Ch.gi-gong) may be made on
the basis of the hidden point of heaven which utilises the eight trigrams
(spar-brgyad gnam-gyi gab-tshe) to determine the degree of marital
compatibility, or on the basis of the hidden point of earth which utilises
the nine numeric squares (sme-dgu sa-yi gab-tshe) to determine the time for the
bride to leave the parental home (lam-du 'jug-pa), or finally on the basis of the
hidden point of the offspring of heaven and earth, which utilises the twelve
year-signs (lo-skor bcu-gnyis sras-kyi gab-tshe) to determine remedial methods.
Depending upon the earlier calculations various rituals are prescribed to
take place during the actual wedding ceremony. These include the recitation
of Buddhist scriptures or retentive charms pertaining to the marriage
ceremony, such as the sNang-ba brgyad, and the making of amulets, thread-
crosses and ritual charms.
Martial conquest gyul-rgyal
An esoteric system of divination based on the Svarodaya Tantra, which is said
to have Śaivite origins and which reached Tibet from Jumla in Western Nepal
during the thirteenth century. The most important indigenous Tibetan
commentary is the Supreme Delight(mChog-dga), composed by Phug-pa lhun-
grub rgya-mtsho in the mid-fifteenth century. Interest in the martial
calculations of the Svarodaya Tantra appears to have reached its height
during the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries when military
strategy assumed a particular importance for Dalai Lama v and his third
regent Sangs-rgyas rgya-mtsho during the Tibetan civil war. Although this
system is rarely practised at the present day, the transmission of the Svarodaya
Tantra has been maintained, along with extant examples of 178 charts, which
correspond to the themes of the text's ten chapters.
Means for attainment sgrub-thabs; Skt. sādhana
The literature of the Buddhist tantras is classified into tantra-texts and means
for attainment. The former are general expositions concerning the continua
of the ground, path and result associated with a particular mandala of deities,
while the latter are specific blueprints derived from and inspired by the
former as the detailed means for attainment of a specific mandala of deities.
Such practices have four integral phases, which are often known as the four
aspects of ritual service and means for attainment (bsnyen-sgrub yan-lag bzhi).
Meditational deity yi-dam; Skt. istadevatā
One of the three roots (rtsa-ba gsum) of spiritual practice, along with the
spiritual teacher and the ďākini. The meditational deities are said to confer supreme
accomplishment on the meditator, in contrast to the spiritual teacher who confers
to the remainder. Then, starting from Kham, one counts anti-clockwise
through to the current trigram of the mother corresponding to that number, and
it will be identical to the child's natal trigram.
Natal year skyes-lo
The calculation based on the natal year is important in natal horoscope, in
divinations concerning marital compatibility, and in divinations that examine
the conjunction of certain trigrams with the natal year to determine obstacle years.
In particular, diverse readings are given in natal horoscope for each of the
sixty natal years of the sexagenary cycle, taking into account whether any of
the elemental aspects of the natal year (vitality, body, destiny or luck) are
inhibited (gcod-'dral kha-dmar). There are also calculations in which the natal
year-sign is combined with the multiple of nine and the tomb-sign.
Nine numeric squares sme-ba dgu
See Numeric squares.
Nine vehicles theg-pa dgu
When the Buddhist teachings are classified according to their power, they are
described as a vehicle (Skt. yāna) or a series of hierarchical vehicles, arranged in
the manner of the rungs of a ladder. Among these, the specific enumeration of
nine vehicles or nine sequences of the vehicle (Skt. navayāna) accords with the
standpoint of the rNying-ma school, which systematises the Buddhist
teachings according to the hierarchy of the three outer or causal vehicles
(those of the pious attendants, hermit buddhas and bodhisattvas), those of the three
outer classes of tantra (Kriyātantra, Ubhayatantra and Yogatantra), and those
of the three inner classes of tantra (Mahāyoga, Anuyoga and Atiyoga).
Nirvāņa myang-'das
Nirvāṇa' (lit. 'state beyond sorrow') refers to the ultimate attainment of
buddhahood, the permanent cessation of all suffering and the dissonant mental states
that cause and perpetuate suffering, along with all obscure misconceptions
with regard to the nature of emptiness. Nirvāṇa is therefore the antithesis of
cyclic existence. Since it is through the misapprehension of the nature of actual
reality that conscious states of delusion arise, a total elimination of these
dissonant mental states can only be effected by generating a genuine insight
into the true nature of actual reality. The bodhisattva paths expounded in the
sūtras, and the aspects of the continuum of the path expounded in the tantras,
are all regarded as the means by which nirvāṇa might be attained.
Numeric squares sme-ba
The nine numeric squares (Tib. sme-ba dgu; Ch. jiu gong), along with the animal
signs, trigrams, planets and constellations, are one of the basic devices through which
the elemental relationships may be calculated in elemental divination. They
comprise White One, Black Two, Blue Three, Green Four, Yellow Five,
White Six, Red Seven, White Eight and Red Nine. In terms of the five
elements, the three white numeric squares symbolise iron, Black Two and
Blue Three symbolise water, Green Four symbolises wood, Yellow Five
symbolises earth, while Red Seven and Red Nine symbolise fire. Then, in
terms of the corresponding natal year-signs, White Eight, Black Two and
Yellow Five govern the tiger, monkey, pig and snake year-signs; Red Seven,
Green Four and White One govern the mouse, horse, bird and hare year-
signs; while Red Nine, White Six and Blue Three govern the ox, sheep, dog
and dragon year-signs. Nine distinct charts are constructed, based on
different permutations of these nine numeric squares, and these are utilised in
order to calculate the current numeric square and the natal numeric square.
Furthermore, within each year of the cycle, each of the four elemental aspects
(vitality, body, destiny and luck) is associated with its own distinctive
numeric square, and the sexagenary cycle may actually be extended to one of
180 years (sme-phreng gsum) when this information is taken into account. In
natal horoscope, the natal numeric square of the subject's mother and the natal
numeric square indicative of the subject's own luck (rang-klung skyes-pa'i sme-
ba) are important calculations, as are the numeric square divination affecting
three generations of a single family (sme-ba gsum-bsdebs), and the technique in
which numeric squares are superimposed on the grid of the subject's body
(sme-ba'i sa-tshad rtsi-ba). In marriage divinations, the wedding day is determined
by calculating the nuptial numeric squares of the bride and groom (sme-ba'i
lam-rtsis), particularly in combination with the bridal spirits ( 'dom-sbrags).
In divinations concerning obstacle years, there are twenty-eight categories of
obstacle years determined on the basis of the numeric squares and there is
also a technique for examining minor obstacles contingent on the numeric
squares. When divinations are carried out concerning ill-health, the presence
of certain diseases and demonic influences may be recognised on the basis of
the numeric squares (sme-ba'i nad-gdon ngos-bzung), and when the divinations
of death are applied, the numeric squares may indicate retributions associated
with a death, as well as the direction in which a corpse should be disposed.
Natal calendar day skyes-ba'i tshes
The birthday of a subject of divination, which has significance in natal horoscope.
Natal horoscope tshe-rabs las-rtsis
Whether following the fixed system of natal horoscope (mtha'-rtsis) in which
136 divinatory pebbles are utilised, or one of the alternative modes of calculation
outlined in Part IV of the present work, divinations may be made concerning
the prospects for a newly born child. Such prognoses include those pertaining
to the specific natal year, month, day, hour, trigram or numeric square, and more
complicated calculations concerning: the child's prospects for divine glory
(lha-dpal), long life (tshe) and demonic influence (bdud); the weight of the
child's past actions; potential prosperity and misfortune (dpal-byur gnyis); the
impact of the father's trigram and coincidental actions on childbirth (spar-
brgyad rgya-ma); the impact of the mother's planetary luck aspects on
childbirth (gza'-bzhi ma-klungs); the significance of planetary conjunctions
(gza' sum-'dom); the times of childbirth which are inauspicious to parents or
relatives; the five approaches of bad luck (ngan-klungs-kyi sgo lnga); the
greater, middling and lesser degrees of ill-omen (ltas-ngan che-'bring-chung
gsum); the results of childbirth coinciding with the various sectors of growth and
decline (dar-gud-kyi 'bras-bu); the birth of children (bus-pa btsas-rtsis) based on
the coincidence of the parents' destiny elements; the five coincidences of a son or
daughter ending the family line; and the diverse types of superior, average
and inferior children.
Natal hour skyes-dus
The hour of birth, the element of which is said to have a potential impact on the
character or physical appearance of a newly born child. The calculations
pertaining to the natal hour are also significant in natal horoscope.
Natal month skye-zla
In natal horoscope there are predictions which may be made on the basis on the
season of the natal month. See Part iv of the present work.
Natal numeric square skyes-sme
To calculate the natal numeric square, which has importance for natal horoscope and
marriage divinations, the numeric square of the present year should be placed at the
centre of the chart, and one should then count back the subject's age in tens,
following the so-called zigzagging bird-like sequence of calculation, and then
finally subtract any integers less than ten individually. Alternatively, the
number corresponding to the subjects present age should be placed at the
centre of the chart along with the numeric square of the present year and one
should then count forwards into the next sexagenary cycle.
Natal trigram skyes-spar
To calculate the natal trigram, which is associated with the mother's luck element,
one should subtract the age of the child from that of the mother, and add one
Obstacle years [divination] [lo-gcig] keg-rtsis
The divination of obstacle years is applied to determine the degrees of
happiness or suffering that a given subject might experience in the course
of a given year within the sexagenary cycle. Forty-seven divinatory pebbles are
deployed corresponding to the outer (phyi), inner (nang) and intermediate



418
The White Beryl
(bar) calculations, which are respectively made on the basis of the log-men year-
signs, trigrams and numeric squares, along with the secret (gsang) calculation of the
sectors of growth and decline, the most secret (yang-gsang) calculation of the hours
coinciding with the destiny element, the calculation of the multiples of nine and the
tomb-sign calculation. Among these, some of the combined trigram prognoses
correspond directly to the hexagrams of the I Ching, while others are unique
to this system. Other more complicated calculations of obstacle years may be
made by applying the so-called Chinese method of pebble distribution (rgya-
nag rdel-skor), or the three cycles of sPang-rgyan lo-ma.
Odd-numbered signs/trigrams bse-ru
The odd-numbered signs, or ‘rhino-horns', corresponding to the natal years are
generally held to comprise those of the ox, sheep, dog, dragon, mouse and pig,
along with their respective trigrams: Khen, Khon, Khon, Kham, Gin and Gin.
By contrast, when the natal months are calculated, the tiger, snake, monkey and
pig, which represent the first-seasonal months, are also designated as odd-
numbered signs.
Oddiyāna o-rgyan
An ancient kingdom, the birthplace of Padmākara, where a large corpus of
tantric literature is said to have been propagated in the human world for the
first time. It is probably situated in the remote north-west of the Indian
subcontinent. The land of Oddiyāna is associated with a number of great
accomplished masters including Padmasambhava, Kambalapāda and Līlāvajra. On
the basis of traditional Tibetan pilgrimage accounts, such as that written by
O-rgyan-pa Rin-chen-dpal, modern writers identify Oddiyāna as having been
in the region of the Swat valley in Pakistan. The Tibetan form of Oddiyāna,
O-rgyan, is also by extension a name for Padmasambhava himself.
Offering mchod-pa; Skt. puja
A sacramental offering presented to a spiritual teacher or meditational deity as a
means of veneration and producing delight in the object of veneration. There
are offerings associated with body, speech and mind. Thus, an offering can be
of material substance such as flowers, scented water and food; verbal, such
the recitation of songs of praise; or mental, such as the offering of the positive
potentials which one may have accumulated as a result of having engaged in
wholesome deeds beneficial to others. More specifically, the tantras identify
four kinds of offering that are to be made: outer, inner, secret and real
offerings. The outer offerings of enjoyment (phyi nyer-spyod-kyi mchod-pa)
comprise the eight associated with the eight offering goddesses - including
water, flowers, incense, light, perfume, food and sound - as well as song,
dance and meditation. Inner offerings of commitment (nang dam-rdzas-kyi
mchod-pa) are the pure essences of semen, blood and flesh, transformed
through the yoga of the energy channels, currents and seminal points within
the subtle body. Secret offerings of sexual union and liberation' (gsang-ba
sbyor-sgrol-gyi mchod-pa) are those esoteric rites and practices, which
transform the five poisons into the five pristine cognitions. Real offerings of great
sameness (de-ho-na-nyid mnyam-pa chen-po'i mchod-pa) are the supreme bliss
of purity and sameness, through which the meditator and the deity are
identified
Offering of purificatory smoke bsangs
A ritual offering of smoke, usually prepared in a vase-shaped incense burner,
when fresh juniper is burnt along with roasted barley flour and other
consecrated objects. The offering is made in conjunction with the recitation
of specific liturgical prayers, which indicate how obstacles are removed by the
appeasement and pacification of mundane spirits or malevolent forces.
Among the most important prayers of this genre is the Ri-bo bsangs-mchod,
derived from the Rig-'dzin srog-sgrub cycle discovered by the treasure-finder
Lha-btsun nam-mkha' jigs-med.
Pebbles rde'ul rdel
See divinatory pebbles.
Phug-pa school phug-lugs
School of calendrical reckoning and astrology based on the commentarial
traditions of the Abridged Tantra of the Wheel of Time (Laghukālacakratantra);
it was founded in the fifteenth century by mKhas-dbang Nor-bzang rGya-
mtsho and Phug-pa Lhun-grub rGya-mtsho, the authors of the Oral
Transmissions of the White Lotus: Mother and Sons (Pad-dkar zhal-lung ma-bu).
The lineage was further elucidated in the seventeenth century by Sangs-rgyas
rGya-mtsho, the author of White Beryl(Vaidūrya dKar-po).
Plague-causing spirits gnyan
A class of malign atmospheric spirits said to be responsible for inflicting
eighteen diverse types of plague, including paralysis.
Planets gza'
The so-called ‘eight planets’ (gza'-brgyad) are known throughout the Indian
and Chinese traditions and give their names to the days of the week. They
comprise the Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn, after
whom the days Sunday through to Saturday are respectively named, along
with Rāhu, the eclipser, who infiltrates the other seven. Unlike the Indian
tradition, which emphasises the celestial position of the planets, the
calculations employed in elemental divination are based on the relationships formed
by the elements to which the eight planets correspond. Accordingly, the Sun
and Mars represent fire, and have power over the south. The Moon and
Mercury represent water, and have power over the north. Jupiter represents
wood and has power over the east. Venus represents iron and has power over
the west. Saturn represents earth, and has power over the intermediate
directions. These planets are said to form outer, intermediate, and inner
aspects when they respectively govern the sexagenary cycle, the twelve-year
cycle, and the eight trigrams (see Part 1 of the present work.) The calendar days of
the lunar month may also be named sequentially after the planets to determine
prognoses of growth and decline, while in natal horoscope there are calculations
concerning the impact on childbirth of greater and lesser planetary
conjunctions (gza' chung-ba-dang che-ba), a triple planetary conjunction (gza'-
gsum 'dom), a triple planetary alliance (gza'-spun gsum), an extraneous
planetary aspect (gza'-gzhan skyes), and the mother's planetary luck aspects. In
marriage divination, there are further calculations which consider the opportune
nuptial planets or weekdays for a wedding ceremony (gza'i lam-rtsis).
Prayer flag rlung-rta
A flag inscribed with mantras, which may be white, blue, yellow, red or green
corresponding to the five distinctive elements, and which may be hoisted on a
roof-top or courtyard flagpole, or secured to a cairn on a mountain pass. The
power of the inscribed prayers is then activated by the blowing of the wind,
promoting both the well-being of the individuals in whose names the prayer
flag was erected and the well-being of all sentient beings in general.
Pristine cognition ye-shes, Skt. jñāna
One of the five fruitional aspects of a buddha, equivalent to buddha-mind.
Although all sentient beings possess the potential for generating pristine
cognition within their mental continuum, the psychological confusions and
deluded tendencies that defile the mind obstruct the development of these
inherent potentials, making them appear instead as aspects of mundane
consciousness (vijñāna). Buddhist literature mentions five types of pristine
cognition, which are the actual perceptual modes of the three buddha-bodies
and the quintessential perfected states of our own mental faculties. Each of
the five is also associated with one or other of the five male buddhas. Thus,
Vairocana's pristine cognition of reality's expanse (dharmadhātujñāna) is the
perception of the buddha-body of reality; Aksobhya Vajrasattva's mirror-like
pristine cognition (ādarśajñāna), Ratnasambhava's pristine cognition of
sameness (samatājñāna), and Amitābha's pristine cognition of discernment
(pratyaveksaņajñāna) are collectively the perception of the buddha-body of
perfect resource (sambhogakāya); and Amoghasiddhi's pristine cognition of
accomplishment is the perception of the buddha-body of emanation
(nirmānakāya).
Protectors of the [Buddhist] doctrine chos-skyong/srung-ma; Skt. dharmapāla
A class of beings assigned with the task of protecting the Buddhist teachings
and its sincere practitioners. Many of the Tibetan protectors were originally
malevolent forces, which were bound under an oath of allegiance to
Buddhism by Padmasambhava when he arrived in Tibet during the eighth
century. There are two main categories of protectors: 1) supramundane
protectors, such as Mahākāla, Ekajatī, Vajrasādhu and Rāhula, who are the
wrathful manifestations of enlightened beings; and 2) worldly protectors
(many of whom were originally malevolent forces) who were coerced and
bound under an oath of allegiance to Buddhism. Such protectors can have
male or female forms.
philosophical schools of thought. Buddhism also asserts the continuity of
consciousness after the physical death of the person. The Buddhist doctrine of
rebirth, however, is based on the principal premises of causality, the impact of
inherited past actions, the acceptance of a beginningless continuum of
consciousness, and the understanding of quiescence or nirvāṇa as the antithesis
to the rebirth process.
Reliquary stūpa gdung-rten
A stūpa containing the embalmed or cremated relics of a deceased spiritual
teacher.
Rites of aversion zlog-chog
Liturgies designed to avert negative forces, ill-health, impending death, and
so forth; they exist alongside main spiritual practices in all traditions of
Tibetan Buddhism and Bon.
Rites of “liberation' sgrol-ba
Rites taught in the context of Mahāyoga (see Tantra) that are applied in order
to bring to an end the life of a hostile being who is wholly intent on negative
actions harmful to Buddhism and its sincere practitioners, and thereafter to
transfer the consciousness of the deceased out of great compassion to a realm
of higher rebirth, thus enabling him or her to avoid an unfavourable rebirth
which would otherwise be inevitable in consequence of their preponderance
of negative past actions. It is emphasised that such practices can only be applied
by accomplished masters who have attained proficiency in consciousness
transference.
Rites of reparation and confession bskang-bshags
A spiritual practice that involves the disclosure and purification of
accumulated negative actions. The successful application of confession must
be undertaken within the framework of what are known as the four antidotal
powers: 1) the power of repentance with respect to the negative acts one has
committed; 2) the power of reliance on the Three Precious Jewels and enlightened
mind; 3) the power of the actual antidote, which may entail meditation on
emptiness, loving kindness or mantra recitation; and 4) the power of resolve
never to indulge wilfully in such negative acts again.
Ritual aversion of the mataraḥ ma-mo'i bzlog-mangs
A rite of aversion in which negative forces are exorcised, utilising the aid of the
class of imprecatory female spirits.
Ritual charm gtol gzhug-gcod gto
A type of ritual object, which sometimes takes the form of a gtor-ma offering or
a pictorial diagram, designed to turn inauspicious circumstances into good
luck and prosperity.
Ritual dagger phur-ba
See Dagger.
Ritual deception of death 'chi bslu-ba
A series of ritual practices designed to avert the signs or indications of
impending death, and thereby prolong life.
Ritual service and means of attainment bsnyen-sgrub; Skt. sevāsādhana
Whenever any means for attainment is practised, it will comprise the four
branches ofʻritual service and attainment: The four branches are as
follows: ritual service (sevā) entails the recitation of mantra and one-pointed
prayerful devotion to a visualised meditational deity; further ritual service
(upasevā) entails the prayer that the meditational deity's blessings will
descend, transforming the mundane body, speech and mind into the three
syllables of indestructible reality (rdo-rje yig-'bru gsum); attainment (sādhana)
entails that accomplishments are received from the buddhas of the ten directions
into the meditational deity and thence into oneself, in actuality, meditation
or dreams; and great attainment (mahāsādhana) refers to the ultimate
realisation experienced when body, speech and mind are identified with
the meditational deity.
rnga-zor calculation
A calculation employed when obstacle years are determined in conjunction with
the multiples of nine. This calculation, named after the geomantic spirit lord of the soil
rNga-zor, concerns the subject's nativity luck (btsas-klungs mig).
Paranirmitavaśavartin gzhan-'phrul dbang-byed
The name of the highest of the six god-realms subsumed within the world-
system of desire (see Three world-systems).
Parinirvāņa yongs-su mya-ngan-las 'das
The expression 'final nirvāṇa' (Skt. parinirvāṇa) refers specifically to the passing
away of buddhas, such as Śākyamuni, and is considered to be the last of the
twelve principal deeds demonstrated by the buddha-body of emanation,
exemplified by the death of Śākyamuni at Kuśinigara.
Past actions las; Skt. karma
Karma' refers to the doctrine of evolutionary past actions and their
consequences. It includes both the actual actions (physical, verbal and
mental) and the psychological imprints and tendencies created within the
mind by such actions. After the performance of an action a causal chain is
maintained within the mental continuum which continues through
successive rebirths. Such an evolutionary potential is later activated when it
interacts with appropriate circumstances and conditions, thus leading to the
fruition of its effects. The doctrine of past actions has two main features:
1) one never experiences the consequences of an action not committed; and
2) the potential of an action once committed is never lost unless obviated by
specific remedies.
Samantabhadra kun-tu bzang-po
The male Buddha Samantabhadra is the foremost figure in the assembly of the
forty-two peaceful deities, representing the buddha-body of actual reality.
Scapegoat effigy glud
A ritual substitute or ‘scapegoat' is constructed in the form of a dough or clay
effigy resembling the subject in order to deflect life-threatening afflictions
from the subject. Such rituals are applied in the context of the ritual deception of
death, and are considered to be an aspect of skilful means.
Secret mantra gsang-sngags, Skt. guhya-mantra
One of the three types of mantra, along with mantras of retention (dhāraṇī) and
gnostic mantras (vidyāmantra). The term 'secret mantra' specifically refers to
the three inner classes of tantra (Mahāyoga, Anuyoga and Atiyoga).
Sectors of growth and decline dar-gud
In elemental divination, the elements may be juxtaposed sequentially with the
so-called twelve successive sectors of growth and decline (dar-gud bcu-gnyis).
Rebirth [process] srid-pa; Skt. bhava
The process of rebirth through which an individual's consciousness migrates
into a subsequent life after death is a concept familiar to most ancient Indian



419
Glossary
Greater Vehicle (see Mahāyāna Buddhism) in ancient India, where the original
stūpa design developed into the monastic vihāra (Skt. caitya). In Tibet, a
series of eight stūpas is frequently constructed, symbolising different events
in the life of Śākyamuni Buddha, and five of these were represented on the five
mountain peaks of Wu Tai Shan (see Part 1 of the present work). Other stūpas
are extraordinarily large, such as those of Boudhnath and Svayambhu in
Nepal, or Sanchi in India and Borabudor in Indonesia, and some enclose
within them entire mandalas of deities, such as the dPal-'khor chos-sde at
rGyal-rtse in gTsang and the Memorial Chorten in Thim-phu, Bhutan.
The symbolism of the stūpa is complex, representing the progression to
buddhahood, the five elements, and so forth. Smaller reliquary stūpas are frequently
built as a funerary memorial to important spiritual teachers, often enshrining
their sacred ashes or embalmed remains. For further details, see A.
Snodgrass, The Symbolism of the Stūpa.
Sūtra mdo
The scriptural transmissions of the sacred doctrine of Buddhism comprise the
canonical sūtras and tantras, as well as their commentarial literature. The
sūtras are the discourses of Sākyamuni Buddha which were taught publicly
to his disciples: pious attendants, bodhisattvas and laity. These discourses are
considered to have been taught in the context of three successive turnings of
the wheel of the sacred doctrine (Skt. dharmacakrapravartana). Among these,
the first includes the Long Discourse (Dīrghāgama), Middle Length Discourses
(Madhyamāgama), Combined Discourses (Samyuktāgama) and Minor Discourses
(Ksudrāgama), which concern the four sublime truths and the nature of
selflessness; the second includes the Perfection of Discriminative Awareness
(Prajñāpāramitā), the Pagoda of Precious Gems (Ratnakūta) and related
discourses which emphasise signlessness, aspirationlessness and emptiness;
and the third includes the Great Bounteousness of the Buddhas
(Buddhāvatamsaka), the Sūtra of the Nucleus of the Tathāgata (Tathāgatgarbha)
and the Lion's Roar of Queen śrīmālā (śrīmālādevī), which emphasise the
excellent analysis of buddha-attributes (see Buddha).
Svāstika gYung-drung
One of the thirty-two designated major marks characterising the buddha-body
of emanation (Skt. nirmāņakāya). In the context of the present work, the
svāstika symbol appears at the centre of the moderately auspicious trigram
formations known as Intimate of Luck (phyva-lon) and Average Luck (phyva-
gYang).
These comprise: conception (dbugs-len), embryo (mngal-'jug), foetus (lus-
rdzogs), birth (skyes), ablution (khrus), clothing (gos), work (las), growth (dar),
decline (gud), ill-health (nad), death (shi-ba) and tomb (dur). The sectors of
growth, work, ablution, clothing, foetus and birth are deemed to be
auspicious, while those of conception, embryo, decline, ill-health, death and
tomb are inauspicious. Positive prognoses are indicated if the element in
question coincides with one of the six auspicious sectors, and negative
outcomes are portended if the reverse is the case. The months, years, days, hours
and trigrams may also be calculated according to these twelve sectors of growth
and decline to indicate the varying degrees of auspicious and inauspicious
prognoses for a given month, year, day, hour or trigram. Each of the twelve
sectors has its distinctive prognosis (kha-dmar), on which see Parts 1 and iv
of the present work. Such calculations are employed in the context of natal
horoscope, marital compatibility, the 'secret' determination of obstacle years, and
the impact of the hour of divination.
Selflessness bdag-med, Skt. nairātmya
In the Buddhist view, all phenomena are ultimately characterised by
selflessness, i.e. they are completely devoid of all self-identity. Selflessness
has two aspects in that it implies the lack of inherent existence both in terms
of the individual person's self-identity (Skt. pudgalanairātmya) and in terms
of material and mental phenomena (Skt. dharmanairātmya). Adherents of
the vehicle of the pious attendants (śrāvakayāna) propound only the former,
emphasising that the self is not substantial or self-sufficient. Nowhere among
the aggregates of the person - whether individually, collectively, or even in
their continuity - can one find a substantial or solid being. In addition, the
adherents of the vehicle of hermit buddhas (pratyekabuddhayāna) realise that
material objects are nothing but a series of indivisible atomic particles,
while bodhisattvas further realise that consciousness is nothing but a series
of indivisible time moments, equating all physical and mental phenomena
with emptiness.
Sensory activity fields skye-mched, Skt. āyatana
Abhidharma (see Hinayāna Buddhism) sources identify twelve sensory activity
fields, six of them external and the remainder internal, divided into pairs as
follows: the activity fields of the eye (cakṣurāyatana) and of form (rūpāyatana);
the activity fields of the ear (śrotrāyatana) and of sound (sabdāyatana); the
activity fields of the nose (ghrānāyatana) and of smell (gandhāyatana); the
activity fields of the tongue (jihvāyatana) and of taste (rasāyatana); the activity
fields of the body (kāyāyatana) and of touch (sprastāyatana); and the activity
fields of the intellect (mana āyatana) and of mental objects or phenomena
(dharmāyatana).
Sensory constituents khams; Skt. dhātu
Abhidharma (see Hinayāna Buddhism) sources identify eighteen sensory or
psychophysical constituents (or spectra): those of the eye, form and visual
consciousness; those of the ear, sound and auditory consciousness; those of
the nose, smell and olfactory consciousness; those of the tongue, taste and
gustatory consciousness; those of the body, touch and tactile consciousness;
and those of the intellect, phenomena and mental consciousness.
Sentient being sems-can/'gro-ba
In a Buddhist context, the sentient being is one who- in contrast to a buddha-
is confined to cyclic existenceor who has attained liberation from it but has not
attained a complete nirvāṇa In the Buddhist view, sentient beings partake of
six classes: gods, antigods, humans, animals, tormented spirits and denizens of hell.
See Six classes of sentient/living beings
Serpentine water spirits klu/klu-mo; Skt. nāgal nāgini
Spirits who frequent oceans, rivers, lakes and springs; they are often regarded
in Buddhist literature as custodians or repositories of submerged treasure-
whether material or spiritual in content. Foremost among them are the eight
great nāga kings, including Takşaka. It is considered important that their
environment should be kept pristine and clean, since agitation or pollution
of the serpentine water spirits is said to provoke leprosy, consumption and
various skin ailments. Various hybrid forms of serpentine spirit are also found
including klu-gnyan, klu-bdud, klu-sman, klu-gza', klu-srin, klu-bsen and klu-
btsan spirits.
Seventh-removed aspect bdun-zur
In natal horoscope and the divination of obstacle yearsin particular, the seventh
animal year-signcounting backwards or forwards from the sign of the subject's
birth or obstacle year is deemed to be auspicious.
Sexagenary cycle rab-byung
See Years
Se-zhig
An archaic Chinese term, transcribed in Tibetan, indicating a year whose
destiny elementforms a son-relationship with its vitality element
Six classes of sentient/living beings 'gro-ba rigs drug
A birth in cyclic existenceis characterised as occurring among one or other of
the six classes of living beings, depending on the nature and maturity of an
individual's past actions The six classes of sentient beingscomprise the three lower
types, who are subject to unfavourable or inferior birth, namely the
inhabitants of the hells the tormented spirits and animals (tiryak) who are
respectively under the sway of aversion, miserliness and delusion; and the
three higher types, namely humans (manusya), antigods and gods, who are
respectively under the sway of attachment, envy and pride.
Six sages sprul-sku thub-drug
The six sages, who form one sub-category of the assembly of the forty-two
peaceful deities, manifest respectively on behalf of the six classes of living beings-
gods, antigods, humans, animals, tormented spirits and hells, to provide a direct
antidote to the dissonant mental states that ensnare sentient beings in the six realms
of cyclic existence. They comprise: Indrasakra, the sage of the gods (lha'i thub-pa
dbang-po brgya-byin); Vemacitra, the sage of the antigods (lha ma-yin-gyi thub-
pa thag-bzang-ris); ſākyasimha or Śākyamuni, the sage of humans (mi'i thub-
pa shākya senge); Sthirasimha, the sage of animals (byal-song thub-pa senge rab-
brtan); Jvālamukha, the sage of the tormented spirits (yi-dvags-kyi thub-pa
kha-'bar-ma); and Yama Dharmarāja, the sage of the hells (dmyal-ba'i thub-pa
chos-kyi rgyal-po).
Six-syllable mantra yi-ge drug-pa; Skt. şadakşara
The six-syllable mantra (“Om Mani Padme Hūm') is that of Avalokiteśvara, the
bodhisattva of compassion. It is recited in order to generate compassion for and
alleviate the sufferings of beings trapped within the six realms of cyclic existence.
Each of the six syllables is associated with a distinct class of beings: Om
alleviates the sufferings of the gods, Ma alleviates those of the antigods, Ni those
of human beings, Pad those of animals, Me those of tormented spirits and Hūm
those of the hells.
Sixth-removed aspect/sign drug-'gras
In natal horoscope and the divination of obstacle years in particular, the sixth animal
year-sign counting backwards or forwards from the sign of the subject's birth or
obstacle year is deemed to be auspicious.
Skilful means thabs
According to Mahāyāna Buddhism, learning in skilful means (Skt. upāyakausalya;
Tib. thabs-la mkhas-pa) refers to the first five perfections cultivated by
bodhisattvas, i.e. generosity, discipline, patience, perseverance and meditative
concentration; when these are integrated with discriminative awareness the sixth
perfection, they form a union of discriminative awareness and means (Skt.
prajñopāya).
Skull-drum dā-ma-ru
A hand-held drum fashioned from two human craniums secured back to back.
It is frequently held in the hands of the wrathful deities and the ļākinſ, and is
generally utilised as a ritual instrument in conjunction with the bell
Spirit lords of the soil sa-bdag; Skt. bhūmipati
A class of geomantic forces whose position rotates - in some cases according
to the years of the sexagenary calendar, and in others according to the months
of the year, the days of the month and the hours of the day. Foremost among
them are King The-se and his courtiers. It is important that the subterranean
locations of the spirit lords should be known when constructing a building or
three-dimensional mandala, and when entering into specific activities.
Spiritual friend dge-ba'i bshes-gsnyen/dge-bshes; Skt. kalyānmitra
A spiritual teacher who can contribute to an individual's progress on the spiritual
path to enlightenment and who acts wholeheartedly for the welfare of his or
her students, adopting a renunciate lifestyle. In Tibet during the eleventh and
twelfth centuries the term became synonymous with the great masters of the
bKa'-gdams-pa school, who combined a scrupulously renunciate lifestyle and
deep humility with profound scholarship and meditative resolve.
Spiritual teacher bla-ma; Skt. guru
One of the three roots (rtsa-ba gsum) of spiritual practice, along with the
meditational deity and the ļākini The spiritual teacher is said to confer blessings on
the meditator, in contrast to the meditational deity who confers supreme
accomplishment and the dākinī, who confers enlightened activities. The original
Sanskrit word ‘guru literally means 'heavy' or 'weighty', and by extension a
'venerable teacher'. The Tibetan equivalent 'bla-ma' (pronounced lama)
means 'unsurpassed' or 'supreme', indicating that the guru is unsurpassed in
terms of being the perfect object toward which meritorious activity should be
directed. However, it is important to note that specific qualifications are
necessary in order to be considered as a spiritual teacher. These qualifications
differ according to the level of spiritual practice at which a teacher is adopted.
sPor-thang scrolls
Documents representing the ancient tradition of elemental divination which were
originally introduced to Tibet by Princess Wencheng in the seventh century.
srang weight
A traditional Tibetan weight, originally identified as one fourteenth of a
rgya-ma, which was later applied to the Chinese scale balance (nya-ga), and
is nowadays equivalent to 100 grams.
Stūpa mchod-rten
A sacred object representative of buddha-mind it is classed along with sacred
images and texts, which respectively represent buddha-body and buddha-speech
Stūpas were originally a symbol of the buddha-body of reality, constructed in a
dome shape to hold the mortal remains of Śākyamuni Buddha, and they have
become the best-known sacred monuments in the Buddhist world. Stūpas are
constructed to a specific architectural design, usually in the shape of a dome,
raised on a square base of several layers, from which protrudes a multilayered
spire. The veneration of stūpas is closely connected to the earliest phase of the
Tantra rgyud
In Buddhism, 'tantra' is defined as a natural continuum or unbroken stream
flowing from fundamental ignorance to enlightenment. As such, it refers to the
continua of ground, path and result (gzhi lam 'bras-bu), which together form
the dynamic process through which all fruitional aspects of buddhahoodare fully
manifested. Through the continuum of the path (lam-gyi rgyud), the
atemporally present continuum of the ground (gzhi'i rgyud) is actualised as the
continuum of the result ('bras-bu'i rgyud). Because tantra includes
sophisticated techniques which, unlike the sütras enable dissonant mental states
such as attachment (rāga) and aversion (dveșa) to be transmuted into blissful
states of realisation, without renunciation or rejection, the practitioner can
cultivate an uninterrupted continuum between the ordinary initial mind, the
advanced mind on the path, and the resultant fully enlightened mind of a
buddha The term 'tantra' may also refer to the literature of the six classes
of tantra (rgyud-sde drug) which expound this dynamic. These comprise the
three outer tantras of austere awareness (phyi dka'-thub rig-pa'i rgyud), namely
Kriyātantra, Ubhayatantra and Yogatantra; and the three inner tantras of
skilful means(nang-pa thabs-kyi rgyud), namely Mahāyoga, Anuyoga and Atiyoga.
Ten bodhisattva levels sa-bcu, Skt. bhumi
The Sanskrit term bhūmi literally means earth, soil, land, ground or level.
Within the Buddhist context, it may denote either the ten causal levels
traversed by bodhisattvasor the additional six resultant levels traversed by
buddhas As to the former, Mahāyānaliterature speaks of ten progressive levels
(daśabhūmi) of realisation through which individual bodhisattvas pass as they
journey towards full enlightenment. These are, in their proper sequence:
1) Joyful (pramuditā), 2) Immaculate (vimalā), 3) Illuminating (prabhākarī),
4) Radiant (arcismatī), 5) Difficult to Overcome (sudurjayā), 6) Manifest
(abhimukhi), 7) Far-reaching (durangamā), 8) Unmoving (acalā), 9) Excellent
Intelligence (sādhumatī) and 10) Clouds of Sacred Doctrine (dharmameghā).
Terracotta image tsha-tsha
A small votive object moulded with clay (which has often been sanctified in
other rites, including cremations) and fashioned in the form of a small stūpaor
bas-relief deity. They are frequently interred within a larger stūpa or kept by
devotees as an object of veneration.
[Thirteen] Charts of Bal-mo lding-skor bal-mo-Iding-skor
A system of elemental divination which in its simplified form employs five sectors
to represent the various contrasts between five designated aspects and the
subject's vitality, body, destiny, luck and numeric square(see Part xi of the
present work). White pebbles are placed to represent mother-or friend-



420
The White Beryl
suffering of rebirth in inferior (lower) existences. The term therefore implies the
bringing about of a transformation in the reader's mind and protection from
the potential dangers of cyclic existence.
Trigrams spar-kha
Li
Khon
Dva
Khen
Kham
Gin
Z
in
Zon
relationships, or identity-relationships of earth and water; and black ones to
represent son- and enemy-relationships, as well as identity-relationships of
wood, iron and fire. The status of the subject will determine which of the
following thirteen charts are employed: White Garuda (bya-khyung dkar-po),
White Snowlion (gangs-seng dkar-mo), Gold Snake of Existence (srid-pa'i
sbrul-gser), Turquoise Dragon (gYu-'brug), Steadfast Elephant (glang-chen
rab-brtan), Striped Tiger (lcags-kyi stag khra-bo), Red Owl (sribs-bya dmar),
Fiery Gemstone (nor-bu 'od-'bar), Blue Peacock (mthing-gi rma-bya), Gold
Dragon, Bird, Turtle and Tiger (gser-gyi rgyi-seng), Golden Estate/Divine
Sheep (lha-lug ser-po), Golden Vase (gser-gyi bum-pa) and Adult Wild Yak
('brong-chen dar-ma).
Thirty Chinese and Tibetan computational charts rgya-bod skor-'go sum-cu
The thirty Chinese and Tibetan Computational Charts are considered to be
among the most ancient aspects of elemental divination (see Part x of the present
work). Each of the charts has eight sectors, where distinctive readings may be
obtained on behalf of different types of individual. The individuals status will
determine which of the following thirty charts is employed: White Garuda
(bya-khyung/garuda dkar-po), White Snowlion (gangs-seng dkar-mo),
Poisonous Snake of Existence (srid-pa'i dug-sbrul), Turquoise Dragon (gYu-
'brug), Steadfast Elephant (glang-chen rab-brtan/sa-yi glang-chen), Striped
Tiger (rgya-stag khra-bo/lcags-kyi stag khra-bo), Copper-Red Ogress (zangs-
kyi srin-po dmar), Golden Vajra (gser-gyi rdo-rje), Talking Parrot (smra-mkhan
ne-tso), Nine-sectored Palace (pho-brang gling-dgu), Supreme Horse (rta-
mchog rin-chen), [Blue-horned/Adult] Wild Yak of the North (byang-kha'i
'brong-chung/'brong-chen dar-ma), Golden [Treasure] Vase (gser-gyi bum-pa),
Peacocks with Crossed Necks (rgya-yi rma-bya), Chinese Temple Roof
[Garuda Gargoyle] (lha-khang rgya-phib), Eight-sectored Golden Estate
(gling-brgyad gser-gyi sa-gzhi), Fiery (Wish-fulfilling] Gemstone (rin-chen/
nor-bu 'od-'bar), Leafy Tree [and Spring] (ljon-shing 'dab-rgyas), Snowcock of
and Spring 7 (lion-shing 'dab-rovas), Snowcock of
Ill-omen (Ita-bya gong-mo), Black Kite (dur-bya nag-po), Saiga Antelope (sha-
ba rgya-bo), Invalid Confined to Sickbed (nad-pa yo-nyal), Red Human Corpse
(mi-ro dmar-po), Pale Coffin (shing-sgrom skya-mo), Nine-stacked Skulls (thod-
pa dgu-brtsegs), Three-headed Spirit lord of the Soil (sa-bdag sgo-gsum),
Golden (Crossed] Vajra (gser-gyi rdo-rje), Eight-spoked Wheel ('khor-lo
rtsibs-brgyad), Spiralling Svāstika (gYung-drung 'khyil-ba), and Eight-petalled
Lotus (padma 'dab-brgyad).
Thread-cross mdos
A wooden frame (nam-mkha) around which coloured threads (rgyang-bu) are
bound and feathers attached; used in rituals designed for the catching and
exorcising of evil spirits and negative forces. The structure takes on different
forms according to the type of spirit or force that is to be exorcised.
Three lower existences ngan-song gsum; Skt. tridurgati
See Inferior/lower existences.
Three Precious Jewels dkon-mchog gsum; Skt. triratna
The Three Precious Jewels comprise the buddha, who embodies the enlightened
mind; the sacred doctrine (Skt. dharma; Tib. chos), which includes both the
realisation of the paths to buddhahood and the sacred scriptures expounding
these paths; and the monastic community (Skt. sangha; Tib. dge-'dun), who
experientially cultivate the sacred doctrine and maintain the Buddhist
traditions. Together these three form the outer object of refuge. They are
regarded as the perfect objects in which refuge should be sought from the
unsatisfactory nature of life in cyclic existence in general, and particularly from
the potential suffering of unfavourable future existences. They are called
precious jewels' because, like wish-fulfilling jewels, they possess the capacity
to provide protection from the perils of cyclic existence.
Three world-systems 'jig-rten-gyi khams gsum; Skt. tridhātu
According to Buddhism, the cyclic existence that ensnares the six classes of living
beings who endure suffering comprises three world-systems, namely: the
world-system of desire (Skt. kāmadhātu), the world-system of form (Skt.
rūpadhātu) and the world-system of formlessness (Skt. ārūpyadhātu). The
world-system of desire, in which an individual's life is dominated by sensual
experiences, is specifically inhabited by all six classes of sentient beings,
including those six species of gods who indulge in and have mastery over
sensory experience (kāmadevaśaſkula). The world-system of form, in which
beings have a comparatively subtle level of consciousness, is regarded as
a state beyond ordinary human existence and inhabited only by the twelve
ordinary classes of gods (dvādaśaprthagjananivāsa) and those of the five pure
abodes (pañcaśuddhanivāsa). Beings who are born in these realms have in
a past life attained the four meditative concentrations (Skt. caturdhyāna),
which offer a temporary respite from physical sensations of pain, mental
unhappiness, mental excitement related to pleasure, and mundane
experiences of joy. Lastly, the world-system of formlessness is regarded
as the highest level of rebirth within cyclic existence and a state where an
individual's physical faculties exist only as potencies, and where
consciousness alone functions. It is said to be inhabited by those formless
gods (Skt. caturārūpyadhātu) who have mastered the four formless meditative
absorptions (Skt. catursamāpatti) known as infinite space, infinite
consciousness, nothing-at-all, and neither cognition nor non-cognition.
These formless meditative absorptions lead progressively to the summit of
cyclical existence with increasing subtlety. However, all sentient beings trapped
within these three world-systems of cyclic existence are said to endure either
physical or mental sufferings (sdug-bsngal).
Tomb-sign dur-mig
The tomb-sign, formed by a combination of specific year-signs and trigrams,
is an important calculation with negative consequences particularly for
natal horoscope and the divination of obstacle years. In the case of the wood element,
the tomb-sign coincides with the sheep and Khon; in the case of the fire element
with the dog and Khen; in the case of the iron element with the ox and Gin; and
in the case of the earth element and water element with the dragon and Zon.
There are twenty possible starting points for the calculation of the tomb-sign
for a given individual (yang-dag bskor-ígo nyi-shu), as indicated in Parts 11, IV
and vi of the present work. Four distinct aspects may be calculated, as
follows. The 'strong tomb-sign' (rang-dur che) is obtained by counting
backwards until one reaches a tomb-sign compatible with the subject's destiny
element. The 'weak tomb-sign' (rang-dur chung) is located seven places from
that (bdun-zur), and also with a compatible destiny element. The 'strong
adversarial tomb-sign’ (gshed-dur che) refers to a tomb-sign in an enemy-
relationship to the subject's destiny element, and the 'weak adversarial
tomb-sign' (gshed-dur chung) is located seven places from that. According
to another tradition, there are also tomb-signs that correspond to the calendar
days of the lunar month.
Tormented spirit yi-dvags, Skt preta
One of the three inferior existences among the six classes of living beings. Born under
the sway of miserliness, the tormented spirits include those terrestrial beings
who endure the sufferings of insatiable hunger and thirst, as well as the
ghostly spirits of the air, including martial haunting spirits, king spirits, elemental
spirits ('byung-po) and imprecatory female spirits.
Transmission lung, Skt āgama
The Buddhist teachings of the 'sacred doctrine' (Skt. saddharma) comprise
both experiential realisations (adhigama; Tib. rtogs-pa) and authoritative
transmissions (āgama; Tib. lung) or blueprints for realisation. The latter
include both the oral teachings and sacred scriptures (Skt. pravacana; Tib.
gsung-rab) delivered by the buddhas, as well as the associated commentaries or
treatises that have been transmitted in an uninterrupted lineage or succession
from ancient times. In Tibetan Buddhism, it is regarded as essential that a
transmission of both the text and its oral commentary is formally received
from an authoritative lineage-holder, if any significant spiritual experience is
to be cultivated: a mere theoretical understanding of these topics is not
deemed sufficient.
Treacherous spirits sri/sri-can
A class of spirits who have broken their oaths or adhered to heretical views.
Treasure gter-ma; Skt. nidhi
The texts and oral teachings of Buddhism have been handed down in two
distinct ways: through a distant oral lineage from one generation to the next
(ring-brgyud bka'-ma), and through a close lineage of revealed teachings with
a more immediate impact (nye-brgyud gter-ma). The Sanskrit ‘nidhi (Tib. gter-
ma), translated in English as ‘treasure' or ‘revealed doctrine' (gter-chos), refers
to those texts and sacred objects which were concealed in the past in order
that they might be protected and revealed in the future for the benefit of
posterity. The tradition of concealing texts as treasure is extremely ancient
in India and China. Within Indian Buddhism, the Prajñāpāramitā sūtras are
said to have been revealed when Nāgārjuna received them in the form of
treasure from the serpentine water spirits. A recension of the sādhana class of
Mahāyoga tantras is also said to have been revealed to eight great masters,
including Nāgārjuna, in the Sītavana charnel ground near Vajrāsana. In
Tibet, the tradition of the treasures was introduced by Padmasambhava and
his students, who concealed texts and sacred objects at geomantic power
places on the landscape, entrusting them to their respective custodians or
treasure-lords (gter-bdag) or to the dākinīs for safe keeping, with the prediction
that they would be discovered at some future time by a prophesied treasure-
finder. Accordingly, it is believed that the students of Padmasambhava have
continued to emanate in the forms of treasure-finders in successive centuries
in order to reveal these treasure-doctrines. Other kinds of treasure-doctrine
are also recognised, revealed directly from the enlightened intention of
buddha-mind in a telepathic manner (dgongs-gter) or in a pure visionary
experience (dag-snang).
Treasure-doctrine gter-chos
An oral teaching or text discovered in the form of a treasure.
Treasure-finder gter-ston
An accomplished master holding an authentic lineage who successfully reveals a
hidden treasure-doctrine (see Treasure) or sacred object, in full accordance with
the prophesies made by Padmasambhava or a specific concealer of treasure-
doctrines.
Treatise bstan-bcos; Skt. śāstra
The authentic transmissions of the Buddha's teachings (Skt. āgama) include
the actual teachings of the buddhas (Skt. pravacana) and the authentic
commentaries or treatises elucidating their meaning. An authentic treatise
is said to refine and purify obscurations and protect the reader from the
The eight trigrams (Tib. spar-kha brgyad; Ch. ba gua), along with the animal
signs, numeric squares, planets and constellations, are one of the basic devices through
which the elemental relationships may be calculated in elemental divination. They
comprise Li, which represents fire and is in the south; Khon, which represents
earth and is in the south-west; Dva, which represents iron and is in the west;
Khen, which represents heaven or space and is in the north-west; Kham,
which represents water and is in the north; Gin, which represents mountain
and is in the north-east; Zin, which represents wood and is in the east; and
Zon, which represents air and is in the south-east. The trigrams symbolic of
heaven, space, mountain and air are sometimes subsumed within the earth
element, for which reason these four are all depicted as yellow. Each of the
trigrams is surrounded by four auspicious and four inauspicious sectors
which by their layout and direction indicate the corresponding auspicious
and inauspicious relationships a given trigram forms with the other trigrams.
Pairs of trigrams form diverse types of relationship. Altogether there are four
auspicious, one neutral, and four inauspicious sorts of relationship. The
current trigram and the natal trigram are important for natal horoscope (see Part iv of
the present work). In marriage divinations (see Part v) there are important
calculations to determine compatibility by examining inauspicious year-signs
and trigrams of the bride and groom, while the calculation of the wedding day
depends to some extent on the nuptial trigrams (spar-kha'i lam-rtsis) and the
bride's natal trigram. When divinations of obstacle years are applied, there are
reckoned to be twenty-seven general obstacles associated with the trigrams,
and the conjunction of multiples of nine with the trigrams (spar-kha'i dgu-mig) is
also significant (see Part vi). Diseases and demonic influences may also be
divined on the basis of the subject's trigram (spar-kha'i nad ngos-bzung), as
indicated in Part VIII, while divinations concerning death examine potential
retributions in association with the trigrams. Finally, according to another
tradition, the calendar days of the lunar month and the hours of the day may also
be calculated in terms of the eight trigrams.
tsam-pa
Roasted barley flour, the staple diet of Tibet.
Twelve khri-sgo khri-sgo bcu-gnyis
A calculation employed when divinations are made concerning the wedding
day. It determines whether the enemy's sector will be destroyed (dgra-khyim
gzhom-pa) and the wealth sector adopted (nor-khyim blang-ba), or whether the
portents suggest a marriage within the same sector (rang-khyim 'bubs/'bugs).
For example, the mouse and pig are the year-signs of the bride that destroy the
enemy sector of the year, which suggests an open opportunity for marriage in
the ox and sheep years. Similarly, the tiger and hare year-signs suggest an
open opportunity for marriage in the bird or monkey years; the horse and
snake do so for marriage in the mouse and pig years; the bird and monkey do
so for marriage in the horse and snake years; and the ox, dog, sheep and
dragon do so for marriage in the tiger or hare year.
Twelve links of dependent origination rten-'brel bcu-gnyis
See Dependent origination.
Twelve-year cycle lo-'gros bcu-gnyis
See Years.
Two modes of selflessness bdag-med rnam-gnyis
See Selflessness.
Vajra rdo-rje
A sceptre-like ritual object that is held in the right palm when a ritual bell is
played; it is emblematic of the indestructible reality of buddha-body, buddha-speech and
buddha-mind. The sceptre symbolises skilful means and the bell, discriminative
awareness.
Vase of longevity tshe-bum
A ritual implement that is held in the hands of the deity Amitāyus, who
represents long life, and is employed in empowerment ceremonies as a
container of longevity pills (tshe-ril) and nectar.
Vehicle theg-pa; Skt. yāna
When the Buddhist teachings are classified according to their power, they are
described as a vehicle or a series of vehicles, which are arranged hierarchically
in the manner of the rungs of a ladder. The term ‘vehicle' suggests a dynamic
momentum leading to the attainment of nirvāṇa. Although from one
standpoint there may be as many vehicles as there are thoughts arising in the
mind, the tendency to classify the teachings into diverse vehicles has
prevailed. Accordingly, the expression ‘two vehicles' refers to the distinction
between the Lesser Vehicle (see Hinayāna Buddhism) and the Greater Vehicle (see
Mahāyāna Buddhism); the expression ‘three vehicles' or 'three causal vehicles'



421
Glossary
to the diverse techniques through which the meditator unites with
fundamental reality during the perfection stage of meditation. As such, it
includes mental and physical practices that refine the energy channels, vital
energies and seminal points within the subtle body, as well as practices that
cultivate discriminative awareness, and the coalescence of emptiness respectively
with the four delights, with inner radiance and with non-conceptualisation.
Yogin/yogini rnal-'byor-pal rnal-'byor-ma
An adept of yoga (male/female forms).
Z
Zor missile
Vows (of Buddhism) sdom-pa
The vows undertaken by practitioners of Buddhism, which are undertaken
voluntarily in order to facilitate an individual's progress on the spiritual path
to enlightenment, include short-term vows such as the One Day Vows;
lifelong vows such as the monastic vows of a fully ordained monk or nun; and
permanent vows associated with the Greater Vehicle (see Mahāyāna Buddhism),
which are to be maintained over a succession of lifetimes. Basically, all such
vows may be subsumed within three categories: the monastic vows of the
Vinaya, the special vows of the bodhisattvas, and the special commitments
undertaken by practitioners of the tantras. For an explanation of the first and
third of these categories, see their respectively entries. As for the second, the
sūtras of the Greater Vehicle, exemplified by the Sūtra of Ākāśagarbha, indicate
that bodhisattvas must be careful to maintain their altruistic vows, expressed
in the verses of the four immeasurable aspirations, and to avoid nineteen
specifically enumerated root downfalls (Skt. mūlāpatti) and forty-six
transgressions (Skt. duskrta). Among the root downfalls there are five that
affect kings, five that affect councillors, eight that affect ordinary persons, and
one that affects all beings (i.e. to abandon the cultivation of an enlightened
attitude). The transgressions, enumerated in Candragomin's Twenty Verses on
the Bodhisattva Vow, include thirty-four that contradict an individual
bodhisattva's accumulation of merit and twelve that contradict altruistic acts
undertaken on behalf of others. In all schools of Tibetan Buddhism, the
Vinaya, bodhisattva vows and commitments of the tantras are fully
integrated.
A type of gtor-ma offering used in rituals of exorcism, and cast as a weapon in
order to destroy malevolent or negative forces.
w
refers to the vehicles of pious attendants, hermit buddhas and bodhisattvas. The
rNying-ma school divides Buddhist teachings into nine vehicles.
Vinaya 'dul-ba
The Sanskrit term‘vinaya' (lit. discipline') refers to monastic discipline
maintained by members of the Buddhist community; this includes the ethical
codes that regulate the life of monks, nuns, novices and laity. The collection
of Śākyamuni Buddha's discourses that elucidate and define the principles of
these ethical codes (including the administrative guidelines for running a
monastery) are known as the Vinayapitaka, and this is one of the three primary
collections of discourses which comprise the Buddhist canon (Skt. tripitaka).
Based on different interpretations relating to the subtler points of the
discourses on Vinaya there emerged, in ancient India, several distinct
schools, including the Sthaviravādin, the Sarvāstivādin and the
Dharmagupta. The Vinaya tradition that became predominant in Tibet is
that of the Sarvāstivādins. According to this tradition, the eight types of
observance are as follows: 1) one-day vows that require laypeople to abstain
over a twenty-four hour period from killing, sexual misconduct, stealing,
lying, alcohol, frivolous activities, eating after lunch, and using high seats or
beds; 2–3) five vows of the male and female laity (Skt. upāsaka/upāsikā), which
are not to kill, lie, steal, be intoxicated, or commit sexual misconduct; 4–5) the
vows of the novice monk and nun (Skt. śrāmanera/śrāmaņerikā), which include
the ten fundamentals of monastic training (śiksapada) and thirty-three vows
concerning subsidiary transgressions which are to be guarded against; 6) the
vows of a probationary nun (Skt. śiksamāņa), which include six primary
observances and six consequential observances; 7) the 253 vows of a fully
ordained monk (Skt. bhikṣu), which comprise: the four defeats (pārājikā), the
thirteen residual transgressions (sanghāvaśesa), the thirty downfalls to be
publicly abandoned (pāyantika), the ninety individual transgressions or
isolated downfalls (pratideśaya), and the 112 minor transgressions (duskrta);
and 8) the 364 vows maintained by fully ordained nuns (Skt. bhikṣuṇī), which
comprise: eight defeats (parājikadharma), twenty residual transgressions
(sanghā-vaśesadharma), 180 downfalls (āpatti), eleven individual confessions
(pratideśaya) and 112 transgressions (duskrta).
Vital energy rlung, Skt. vāyu
In the tantras and related medical traditions, it is said that there are ten kinds
of vital energy or subtle winds that flow through the 72,000 energy channels
(Skt. nādī) of the body, and thereby sustain life, giving rise to various
conceptual states within the individuals mind. They comprise five inner vital
energies (nang-gi rlung lnga), which influence the body's inner motility, and
five outer vital energies (phyi-'i rlung lnga), which have specific effects on the
outward motility of the body. The former are associated with the five
elements (earth, water, fire, air, space) and their respective colour tones
(yellow, white, red, green, blue). The latter comprise life-breath (Skt. prāna;
Tib. srog-'dzin), muscular movement (Skt. vyāpin), digestion (Skt. samāna),
semiotic/vocal movement (Skt. udāna) and reproduction/waste disposal
(Skt. apāna). On a physical level, it is important, according to the Tibetan
medical tradition, that vital energy remains in balance with bile and phlegm,
which are collectively known as the three humours. Then, as far as the subtle
body is concerned, the movement of vital energy through the energy
channels of the subtle body is refined in the context of the perfection stage
of meditation. Ordinarily, in the case of individuals who have not cultivated
such practices, both vital energy and subtle mind are diffused via the right
and left energy channels respectively and thereby come to permeate the
entire network of the body's minor channels. This dissipated vital energy is
known as the vital energy of past actions (las-kyi rlung) because it is activated by
dissonant mental states, and the influence of past actions predominates, obscuring
the inner radiance of the subtle mind. However, when the practices of the
perfection stage of meditation are applied, both vital energy and subtle
mind are fused together within the central energy channel of the body
(Skt. avadhūti), the knots which block their combined movement through the
energy centres (Skt. cakra) located on the central energy channel are untied,
and the non-conceptual inner radiance arises, for which reason it is then
known as the vital energy of pristine cognition.
Vitality element srog
One of the four aspects of elemental divination on the basis of which calculations
can be made concerning the status of the life-essence of sentient beings, which
moves through the cycle of the lifespan principle (tshe-rtsa) from the moment
of birth until the moment of death. When the vitality is weak, ritual ransom
of vitality (srog bslu-ba) may be performed to restore its potency. The vitality
element corresponding to a given year-sign is the very element governing the
natural location of the corresponding animal. Thus, wood governing the
eastern direction is the vitality element of the tiger and hare years, fire
governing the south is the vitality element of the horse and snake years, iron
governing the west is the vitality element of the bird and monkey years,
water governing the north is the vitality element of the mouse and pig years,
while earth, governing the intermediate directions is the vitality element of
the ox, sheep, dog and dragon years. In natal horoscope, predictions based on the
type of relationship formed between a subject’s vitality and destiny elements are
important.
Water element chu
One of the five elements, according to the system of elemental divination. The
water element is symbolised by a blue circle, numerically represented by the
number three, and located in the north of the divination turtle, along with the
trigram Kham, the mouse and pig signs, Moon, Mercury and the six northern
constellations. Water is described as flowing and its function is one of
mollification, inherent in a diet of liquid refreshments including wine and
water, while within the body it is represented by the blood, serum and
kidneys. Socially, water relates to the labouring classes, to Bon-po priests,
sisters and female in-laws.
Wood element shing
One of the five elements, according to the system of elemental divination. The
wood element is symbolised by a green tree, numerically represented by the
number one, and located in the east of the divination turtle, along with the trigram
Zin, the tiger and hare signs, Jupiter and the six eastern constellations. Wood is
described as growing straight and upright, and its function is one of lightness
and mobility, inherent in a diet of fruit and cooked vegetables, while within
the body it is represented by the blood-vessels, nerves and liver. Socially,
wood relates to the priestly class, the kingly type, and to paternal uncles.
Wooden slate khram-shing
A wooden board carried by the acolytes of Yama Dharmarāja, on which
notches are crossed, indicating an individuals impending death.
World-system 'jig-rten-gyi khams; Skt. loka-dhātu
See Three world-systems
antia
Yams-nad
A type of infectious plague.
Years lo
According to the system of elemental divination, the lunar years may be calculated
according to a twelve-year cycle (lo-'gros bcu-gnyis, Ch. shi-er shu xiang), which
accords with the sequence: mouse, ox, tiger, hare, dragon, snake, horse, sheep,
monkey, bird, dog and pig, or according to a sexagenary cycle (rab-byung), in
which each of these animals is combined with each of the five elements in
turn. In addition, each of the years has four aspects, corresponding to its vitality,
body, destiny and luck elements. A further extension into a cycle of 180 years is
obtained when the vitality, destiny and body numeric squares are differentiated
for each of the sixty years. In addition, there are ancient Chinese calculations
which determine the twenty-four meteorological phases of the year (dus-
tshigs nyer-bzhi; Ch. er-shi si jie-qı), and the sequence of the years may also be
correlated with the twelve sectors of growth and decline, or with the four tomb-signs.
When the years are counted, there is both a standard (dkyus-ma) method of
consecutive calculation, and an inverse method (ldog) of counting; the latter
determines the so-called log-men aspects, which are important for natal horoscope
in particular.
Year-sign lo-rtags
Sentient beings may be born under one of the twelve year-signs: mouse, ox,
tiger, hare, dragon, snake, horse, sheep, monkey, bird, dog and pig. (See Years.)
Yoga rnal-'byor
The Sanskrit word ‘yoga' (lit. ‘union') is interpreted in Tibetan to mean ‘union
with the fundamental nature of reality'. In Buddhism, therefore, yoga refers



422
The White Beryl
Bibliography and works cited
This bibliography comprises five sections. The first two list the
canonical transmitted precepts of the Buddha and treatises of Indian
origin, which were translated largely from Sanskrit into Tibetan and are
contained respectively in the bka'-'gyurand bs Tan-gyur. The third
lists obscure unidentified works on elemental divination to which a
Chinese origin is traditionally attributed. The fourth contains the titles
of indigenous Tibetan commentaries on elemental divination,
astrology, and other subjects to which our text refers; while the fifth
includes a number of secondary sources in Chinese and Western
languages. The reader should note that all entries except those in the
second and fifth sections of the bibliography are listed in Tibetan
alphabetical order. The abbreviations for catalogue and references
numbers used in this bibliography are fully listed above, p. 412.
Number codes (e.g. i-Tib-248) corresponding to texts in the PL480
collection are given where necessary.
1. Canonical works of Indic origin in Tibetan translation
bka'-'gyur(English title: Canon of Transmitted Precepts in Tibetan Translation). sDe-
dge xylo edition, 56 vols (1,108 texts); see A Complete Catalogue of the Tibetan
Buddhist Canons, ed. H. Ui et al. Sendai: Tohoku University, 1934. Also
Peking xylo edition, 104 vols (1,046 texts); republished (with Peking bsTan-
'gyur) in 168 photo-offset vols with catalogue by Suzuki Research
Foundation, Tokyo/Kyoto, 1955–61.
bKa'-'dus(English title: Gathering of the Transmitted Precepts). Perhaps to be
identified with the Ocean of Doctrine: The Great Gathering of Transmitted
Precepts (bKa'-'dus chos-kyi rgya-mtsho), discovered by O-rgyan Gling-pa, RTD,
vol. 23, pp. 209–429. Xylo. Zangs-mdog dpal-ri, Kalimpong, West Bengal,
n.d.
skye-rabs rgyal-por gdams-pa(English title: Tale of Past Life entitled Instruction for the
King). Identified with Rājavavādaka-nāma-mahāyānasūtra. T 221.
rGya-cher rol-pa'i mdo(English title: Sūtra of Extensive Play; Skt. Lalitavistarasūtra).
T95. French translation by P. Foucaux. Paris, 1947–8.
sGrub-chen bka'-brgyad(English title: Eight Transmitted Precepts: The Great Means
for Attainment). Identified with bKa'-brgyad bde-gshegs 'dus-pa. NGB,
vols 31-32, nos 375–88.
'Chi-med rnga-sgra tshe-mdo(English title: Sūtra of the Sound of the Drum of
Immortality). P 359.
'Jam-dpal snang-brgyad NL, but see sNang-[ba] brgyad.
'Jam-dpal mtshan-brjod(English title: Litany of the Names of Mañjuśrī; Skt.
Mañjuśrīnāmasangītı). T 360, NGB, vol. 15, no. 196. Ed. and trans. R.M.
Davidson, 'The Litany of the Names of Mañjuśrī' in Mélanges chinois et
bouddiques, Institut Belge des Hautes Etudes Chinoises, Brussels, vol. 20
(1981), pp. 1–69. A. Wayman, Chanting the Names of Mañjuśrī.
Boulder/London: Shambhala, 1985.
rNying-ma'i rgyud-'bum(English title: Collected Tantras of the rNying-ma-pa).
Thim-phu: Jamyang Khyentse Rinpoche, 1973. Xylo, 36 vols. Catalogue by
E. Kaneko, Tokyo, 1982.
Ting-'dzin rgyal-po'i gzung(English title: Retentive Mantra of the King of Meditative
Stability; Skt. Samādhirājadhāraṇī). T 586 and T 942.
rTa-gzungs(English title: Dhāranī for Horses). NL.
sTong-chen rab-'joms(Skt. Mahāsahsrapramardaņasūtra). T 558. See gZungs-chen gra-
Inga.
Dus-'khor-gyi rgyud(English title: Tantra of the Wheel of Time; Skt. Kālacakratantra).
See following entry.
dByangs-'char-gyi rgyud (English title: Svarodaya Tantra entitled Martial Conquest;
Skt. Yuddhajaya-nāma-tantrarāja-svarodaya). T 4322.
rMa-bya chen-mo'i gzungs(Skt. Mahāmāyārī-nāma-dhāraṇī), T 559.
gTsug-gtor dkar-nag gzungs See gTsug-tor dkar-mo and gTsug-gtor nag-mo.
gTsug-tor dkar-mo(English title: White Proturberance; Skt. Tathāgatosnīşasītatapatre
aparājita-nāma-dhāraṇī). T 592 and T 986.
gTsug-gtor nag-mo(English title: Black Proturberance). NL.
Tshe-mdo(English title: Sūtra of Amitāyus; Skt. Aparimitāyurjñāna-nāma-
mahāyānasūtra). T 674.
Tshe-gzungs(English title: Dhārarnī of Amitāyus; Skt. Aparimitāyurjñānahrdaya-
nāma-dhāraṇī). T 676 and 1 850.
gZungs-chen gra-Inga(English title: Five Great Retentive Mantras; Skt. Pañcaraksā).
T558–559 and 561-563. A collective name for the
Mahāsahsrapramardanasūtra, the Mahāmāryārīdhāraṇī, the
Mahāpratisāravidyārājñi, the Mahāśītavanasūtra, and the
Mahāmantrānudhārisūtra.
gZungs-bsdud klu-'bum. Nl. Perhaps to be identified with t 1064–1065.
'Oz-zer chen-mo'i gzungs(Skt. Mārīcīdhāranī). T 564.
Yum(English title: Mother, Skt. Prajñāpāramitā). T 8–9 and 12. The collective
name for the long, intermediate, and short versions of the sūtras of the
Transcendental Perfection of Discriminative Awareness (Prajñāpāramitāsūtra),
English trans. of the short version by E. Conze, The Perfection of Wisdom in
Eight Thousand Lines and its Verse Summary. Bolinas: Four Seasons
Foundation, 1973. On the longer version, see E. Conze, The Large Sutra of
Perfect Wisdom. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidas. 1979.
gYang-skyabs(English title: Protection of Luck). NL.
Rin-chen gtsegs-pa(English title: Pagoda of Precious Jewels; Skt. Ratnakūta). T 45–93.
The collective name for an important anthology of sūtras. An extensive
selection is translated in G.C.C. Chang (ed.), A Treasury of Mahāyāna Sutras:
Selections from the Mahāratnakūta. University Park/London: The
Pennsylvania State University Press, 1983.
Lug-gzungs(English title: Dhāraṇī for Sheep). NL.
[Sher-phyin] tog-gzungs A collective name for the retentive mantras associated with
the sūtras of the Transcendental Perfection of Discriminative Awareness
(Prajñāpāramitā), T 932–939.
Sa-snying [mtshan brgya-rtsa brgyad pa gzungs-sngags dang bcas-pa](English title:
Retentive Mantra of Ksitigarbha; Skt. Kșitigarbhāstottaraśatakanāmadhāraṇī).
T 641 and 1 881.
Laghukālacakratantra). T 362. Tib., Skt. and Mongolian edn. R. Vira and
L. Chandra (eds), The Kālacakratantra and Other Texts, Šatapitaka series.
Sarasvati Vihar, New Delhi, vols 69–70, 1966. Tibetan text also contained in
Gdams-ngag mdzod, vol. 10, and Rgyud-sde kun-btus, vol. 17, nos 97–8. On this
tantra, see Dalai Lama and J. Hopkins, The Kalachakra Tantra: Rite of
Initiation. London: Wisdom Publications, 1985. Also J. Newman, ‘A Brief
History of the Kālacakra', in Sopa, Jackson and Newman, eds, The Wheel of
Time: The Kalacakra in Context. Madison: Deer Park Books, 1985.
De-bzhin gshegs-pa'i snying-po'i mdo(English title: Sūtra of the Nucleus of the
Tathāgata; Skt. Tathāgathagarbhasūtra). T 258. MTTWL 231.
gDugs-dkar snang-brgyad nl, but see sNang-[ba] brgyad.
mDo-sde phal-po-che(English title: Sūtra of the Great Bounteousness of the Buddhas;
Skt. Avatamsakasūtra). T 44. English translation from Chinese version by
Thomas Clearly, The Flower Ornament Scripture, 3 vols. Boulder: Shambhala,
1984 onwards.
mDo-sde mdzangs-blun(English title: Sūtra of the Wise and Foolish; Skt.
Damomūrkhasūtra). T 341. English trans. from Mongolian version by S. Frye,
The Sutra of the Wise and the Foolish. Dharamsala: Library of Tibetan Works
and Archives, 1981.
mDo-sde sa bcu-pa(English title: Sūtra of the Ten Bodhisattva Levels; Skt.
Daśabhūmikasūtra). T 44. A section of the Sūtra of the Great Bounteousness of the
Buddhas (Avatamsakasūtra). See under mDo-sde phal-po-che.
rDo-rje gcod-pa(English title: Diamond-Cutter Sūtra; Skt. Vajracchedikāsūtra). T 16.
English translation by E. Conze. Rome: Serie Orientale Roma XIII, 1957
(reprinted 1974).
rDo-rje sder-mo gtsug-gtor(Skt. Vajranakhoşnīşa). NL.
rDo-rje sder-mo'i gzungs(Skt. Vajranakhadhāraṇī). Nl.
rDo-rje rnam-'joms(Skt. Vajravidārana-nāmadhārani). T 750.
Nor-lha-gyi gzungs(English title: Dhāraṇī of Vasudharā; Skt. Vasudharā-nāma-
dhāraṇī). T 662.
sNang-[ba] brgyad(Tib. Sangs-rgyas-kyi chos gsal-zhing yangs-pa snang brgyad; Ch. Fu
fa ming ba guang guang ming jing). T 1067.
Phyag-stong spyan-stong gzungs(English title: Dhāraṇī of Thousand-Armed and
Thousand-Eyed Avalokiteſvara; Ch. Sheng qian shou qian yan zi zai pu sa wu ni da
bei xin guang da zheng yuan man tuo luo ni). T 897.
Phyir-'ong 'gro-phyogs mdo NL.
'Phags-pa bu-mang ston-pa (Skt. Bahuputrapratisarana-nāma-dhāranī). T 615 and
T 976
dBang-phyug-gi mdo NL.
2. Indic commentaries in Tibetan translation
bsTan-'gyur(English title: Canon of Treatises in Tibetan Translation). sDe-dge xylo
edition, 212 vols (3,356 texts); see A Complete Catalogue of the Tibetan Buddhist
Canons, ed. H. Ui et al. Sendai: Tohoku University, 1934. Also Peking xylo
edition, 185 vols (3,786 texts); republished (with Peking bka-'gyur) in 168
photo-offset vols with catalogue by Suzuki Research Foundation,
Tokyo/Kyoto, 1955–61.
Āryaśūra, Tales of the Past Lives of the Buddha (Skt. Jātakamālā; Tib. sKyes-pa'i rabs-
kyi rgyud). T 4150. English translation from Sanskrit by J.S. Speyer. London:
Pali Text Society, 1895.
Asanga, Bodhisattva Levels (Skt. Bodhisattvabhūmi). T 4037. A subdivision of the
Yogācārabhūmi. See MTTWL 41; also M. Tatz, Asanga’s Chapter on Ethics.
Lewiston, New York: The Edwin Mellen Press, 1986.
Bhāvaviveka, Flame of Dialectics (Tarkajvālā). T 3856. Ch. 1 contained in C. Lindtner
(ed.), Miscellanea Buddica. Forlag Copenhagen Akademisk, 1985. See also A.
Heitmann, unpublished PhD thesis, University of Copenhagen.
Candragomin, Twenty Verses on the Bodhisattva Vow (Skt. Bodhisattvasamvara-
vimśaka). T 4081. English trans. by M. Tatz, Candragomin's Twenty Verses on
the Bodhisattva Vow. Dharamsala: Library of Tibetan Works and Archives,
1982.
Candrakīrti Introduction to Madhyamaka (Skt. Madhyamakāvatāra). T 3861. English
trans. by C.W. Huntington and Geshe Namgyal Wangchen, The Emptiness of
Emptiness. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1989.
Dharmakīrti Exposition of Valid Cognition (Skt. Pramāņavārttika). T 4210. For
further information on this text see T. Tillemans, Scripture, Logic, Language.
Boston: Wisdom Publications, 1999.
Garga, Divination Science of the Great Sage Garga Concerning the Disclosure of Omens
(Tib. Thub-pa chen-podrang-srong gar-gas ltas-kyi rnam-pa bstan-pa zhes-bya-
ba'i gtsug-lag; Ch. Da mu ni xian he jia xiang yan xiang shuo shi). T 4321.
Harivarman, Synopsis of Svarodaya (Skt. Svarodayārthasamgraha; Tib. dByangs-'char-
ba'i don bsdus-pa). T 4326.
Maitreya, Analysis of Phenomena and Reality (Skt. Dharmadharmatāvibhāga).
T 4022–4023. English trans. by D.L. Friedmann. Utrecht: University of
Utrecht, 1937. Reprinted Talent, Oregon: Canon Publications, 1984.
Ornament of the Sūtras of the Greater Vehicle (Skt. Mahāyānasūtrālamkāra).
T 4020. French trans. by S. Levi, 2 vols. Paris: Champion, 1907–11. English
trans. by E. Conze, Rome, 1954, and by R. Thurman, Ornament of the
Scriptures of the Universal Vehicle, forthcoming.



423
Bibliography and works cited
Nāgārjuna, Jewel Garland (Skt. Ratnāvalī). T 4158. English translation by
J. Hopkins, The Precious Garland and The Song of the Four Mindfulnesses.
London: George Allen & Unwin, 1975.
Srījayānanda (trans.), Useful Results Concerning the Ascendant Conjunction According to
Svarodaya (Skt. Svarodayalagnaphalopadeśa; Tib. dByangs-'char-ba'i dus-sbyor-
gyi 'bras-bu nye-bar mkho-ba). T 4327.
Vasubandhu, Autocommentary on the Treasury of the Abhidharma
(Skt. Abhidharmakośabhāsyam). T 4089. French translation by L. de la Vallée
Poussin, L’Abhidharmakośa de Vasubandhu. Brussels: Institut Belge des Hautes
Etudes Chinoises, 1971–80 (reprint). English translation from the French by
L. Pruden, Abhidharmakośabhāsyam. Berkeley: Asian Humanities Press, 1988.
3. Untraceable divination texts, reputedly of Chinese origin
Most of the treatises on elemental divination that are considered to be Chinese in origin are no longer
extant. However, their titles, content, and occasional excerpts are known from later Tibetan
commentaries, such as White Beryl.
Kha-bkad bye-brag 'byed-pa'i rgyud.
mKha'-'gro rdo-rje gtsug-lag rgyud.
'Jig-rten sgron-me snga-rtags rgyud.
rTen-cing 'brel-rgyud.
Thugs-rgyud stod-dgu 'dus (English title: Tantra of Buddha-mind entitled Confluence of
All That is Higher).
Dakki snang-gsal ma-bu Inga.
rDo-rje gdan-bzhi phyi-rtags rgyud.
sPrul-rgyud rnam-Inga (English title: Five Emanational Tantras). These comprise:
the Tantra of Buddha-body entitled Clarifying Lamp (sku-rgyud snang-gsal sgron-
me), the Tantra of Buddha-speech entitled Great Broadside (gSung-gi rgyud
'byams-yig chen-mo), the Tantra of Buddha-mind entitled Confluence of All That is
Higher(Thugs-rgyud stod-dgu 'dus), the Tantra of Buddha-attributes entitled
Indestructible Seat(Yon-tan-dag-gi rgyud rdo-rje gdan-gzhi), and the Root
Tantra of Buddha-activities entitled Black Turtle (Phrin-las-kyi rgyud rus-sbal
nag-po rtsa-rgyud).
Phyi mtshan-gyi don-bstan mdo.
Phyi-ma gyim-shad dmigs-sel gson-gyi rgyud.
Phyi-ma ljon-shing lo-'tshol khrus-byed rgyud.
Phyi-ma yi-ge'i mdo'i 'grel-pa.
Phrin-las-kyi rgyud rus-sbal nag-po rtsa-rgyud (English title: Root Tantra of Buddha-
activities entitled Black Turtle).
'Byams-yig chen-mo'i 'grel-pa.
'Byung ba-den bstan thabs-kyi rgyud.
'Byung-ba mtshan-don bstan-pa'i mdo.
Mahā nag-po rtsa-rgyud.
mTshang-kha bkang byin-brlabs rgyud.
Zang-kyam rin-chen gshin-gyi rgyud.
Yon-tan-dag-gi rgyud rdo-rje gdan-gzhi (English title: Tantra of Buddha-attributes
entitled Indestructible Seat).
Rus-sbal-gyi gtan-tshigs rang-dran skye-gnas rgyud.
Rus-sbal rang-'dra'i rgyud (never translated into Tibetan).
gShin-rgyud bi-'dir chen.
Sa-rgyud bong-mgo 'phrul-bam bdun.
gSung-gi rgyud 'byams-yig chen-mo (English title: Tantra of Buddha-speech entitled
Great Broadside).
Lha-rgyud che-chung.
Khyung-nag Śāk-ya Dar-rgyas (fl. 13th century), sGang-sgril. A commentary offering
detailed predictions on obstacle years. Potala archive, Lhasa.
- [with Khams-pa khra-bo], Lo-rgyus rin-chen rtsa-phreng. A commentary on
the legendary origins and transmission of elemental divination. Potala
archive, Lhasa.
mKhas-dbang, Zang-kyam man-ngag. A commentary on the divinations of death.
Potala archive, Lhasa
rGya-phrug dkon-rin, Rin-chen kun-'dus. A commentary on the twelve khri-sgo
divinations concerning opportune marriage dates. Potala archive, Lhasa.
mNga'-ris Pan-chen Padma dBang-rgyal (1487–1543), sDom-gsum rnam-nges (English
title: Ascertainment of the Three Vows), in Dudjom Rinpoche (ed.), Rnying-ma
bka'-ma rgyas-pa, vol. 37. Kalimpong, 1982.
ICang-skya Rol-pa'i rDo-rje (1717-86), Zhing-mchog ri-bo rtse-Inga'i gnas-bshad.
Xining: Qinghai Nationalities Publishing House, 1993.
Chos-rgyal 'Phags-pa (1235–80), Dus-kyi 'khor-lo'i rtsis dus gsal-ba'i sgron-me. On this
and other astrological works by 'Phags-pa, see Schuh, nos 9–17.
'Jam-pa'i dbyangs, rTsa-ba'i rgyud Inga. These are identified with the five primary
tantras of divination science (gtsug-lag-gi rgyud lnga), namely: sDong-po dgu-
'dus shing-gi rgyud, sNang-gsal sgron-me me'i rgyud, Rin-chen kun-"dus sa'i rgyud,
Ba-la patra lcags-kyi rgyud and bDud-rtsi'i bum-pa chu'i rgyud. The first three
are frequently cited by Sangs-rgyas rgya-mtsho and Lo-chen Dharmaśrī.
sDong-po dgu-'dus. Also written as sDong-po kun-'dus, this text focuses on the
wood element.
sKu-rgyud snang-gsal sgron-me (English title: Tantra of Buddha-body entitled
Clarifying Lamp). Also known as gSal-sgron [rtsa-ba] (English title: Root
Tantra of the Clarifying Lamp) or simply rTsa-ba (English title: Root Tantra),
this text focuses on the fire element. Its subdivisions include sNang-gsal ma-
Inga bu-gsum (English title: Five Mother and Three Son Cycles of the Clarifying
Lamp). This work appears not to be extant in its orginal form, but rather in
the redacted gter-ma forms, entitled Rin-chen gsal-ba'i sgron-me (English title:
Clarifying Lamp of Jewels) and gSal-sgron-ma dag-rtsis-kyi rgyud (English title:
Tantra of Accurate Divination from the Mother Cycle of the Clarifying Lamp), the
revelation of which is attributed respectively to Pan-chen da-hu-ra nag-po
and to Shangs-pa smon-lam 'khrul-pa-che.
'Byung-ba gsal-sgron. An alternative title for the gSal-sgron rtsa-ba.
rNying-chen gsal-ba'i sgron-me. A subdivision of the Clarifying Lamp,
enumerating the geomantic spirit lords of the months.
[rTsa-rgyud] rang-'grel nyi-shu-pa (English title: Twenty Verse Auto-
commentary on the Root Tantra). A commentary on the gter-ma redaction of the
Clarifying Lamp
["Byung-ba] rin-chen kun-'dus (English title: Gathering of All Precious
Elements). This text focuses on the earth element and it is the primary source
for geomancy, reputedly received by Takşaka, and later translated from
Chinese into Tibetan by Kun-'byung a-lo-che and Khams-pa lo-tsā-ba gtsug-
bDud-'joms 'Jigs-bral Ye-shes rDo-rje (1904–87), Chos-'byung-dang bstan-gnam
(English title: The Nyingma School of Tibetan Buddhism: Its Fundamentals and
History.). Kalimpong, 1964 onwards. Trans. and ed. Gyurme Dorje and
Matthew Kapstein. Boston: Wisdom Publications, 1991. See also Martin,
no. 472.
Nor-brang 0-rgyan, Nag-rtsis-kyi lo-rgyus 'jam-mgon dgongs-bcud', in Bod-kyi
rtsis-rig kun-'dus chen-mo, vol. 1, pp. 575–647.
Pan-chen Da-hu-ra Nag-po (disc.), Rin-chen gsal-ba'i sgron-me (English title: Precious
Clarifying Lamp). This gter-ma redaction of the Root Tantra of the Clarifying
Lamp was reputedly translated from Chinese by Khams-pa khra-bo. It is the
primary source for natal horoscope. See under 'Jam-pa'i dbyangs.
Pad-dkar Yid-bzhin dBang-po, dByang-'char 'grel-pa gzhan-phan ngo-mtshar rgyan-gyi
me-tog (English title: Wondrous Fire Ornament). Sonam T. Kazi (ed.), Ngagyur
Nyingmay Sungrab, vol. 24; I (Sik)-Tib-97, 98-918024.
dPa'-bo gTsug-lag Phreng-ba (1504–66), rTsis-'grel rin-chen gter-mdzod (English title:
Store of Precious Treasure). nl, but see Schuh, p. 35.
dPal-sprul O-rgyan 'Jigs-med Chos-kyi dBang-po (1808–87), Kun-bzang bla-ma'i zhal-
lung (English title: The Words of My Perfect Teacher). Xylo, Rum-btegs,
Sikkim, c. 1968, I (Sik)-Tib 76-903001. Also in dPal-sprul gsung-'bum, 5 vols.
Chengdu: Sichuan mi-rigs dpe-skrun-khang, 1993. English trans. by
Padmakara Translation Committee. San Francisco: Harper Collins, 1994.
sPug-ston, rGyud-lung kun-'dus. Nl.
Phug-pa Chos-rje bSod-nams Tshe-'dzin-pa, Khog='bugs 'chi-med dga'-ba. A
commentary on the legendary origins and transmission of elemental
divination. Potala archive, Lhasa.
Phug-pa Mi-nyag rGyal-mtshan dPal-bzang (f. 14th century), sTong-thun. A
commentary on the legendary origins and transmission of elemental
divination. Potala archive, Lhasa.
Phug-pa Lhun-Grub rgya-mtsho (Al. 1447), rGya-cher 'grel-pa legs-par bshad-pa'i 'jug-
ngogs mchog-tu dga'-ba'i sgra-dbyangs (short title: mChog-dga'; English title:
Supreme Delight). An extensive commentary on Svarodaya divination,
contained in Bod-kyi rtsis-rig kun-'dus chen-mo, vol. 3, pp. 1–485.
– (with Nor-bzang rgya-mtsho), Pad-dkar zhal-lung ma-bu (English title: Oral
Transmissions of the White Lotus: Mother and Sons). Beijing: Mi-rigs dpe-skrun-
khang, 1999.
Bu-ston Rin-chen sGrub (1290–1364), mKhas-pa dga'-byed (English title: Scholars'
Delight). Xylo, 122 folios. Published in Lokesh Chandra (ed.), Collected Works
of Bu-ston, Part 4, New Delhi, 1965. See Schuh, no. 18. On other astrological
works by Bu-ston, see Schuh, nos 19–25; and Sha-bo tshe-ring (ed.), Bu-ston-
gyi skar-rtsis phyogs-bgrigs. Lanzhou: Gansu mi-rigs dpe-skrun-khang, 1992.
Bo-dong-pa Yon-tan Blo-gros, s Nying-po bsdus-pa rtsa-'grel(English title: Essential
Summation: Root and Commentary,). NL.
Byams-pa Phrin-las, et al., Bod-kyi rtsis-rig kun-'dus chen-mo. 5 vols. Chengdu:
Sichuan mi-rigs dpe-skrun-khang, 1998.
Blo-mthun bSam-gtan, et al., rDa'-yig gsar-khrid. Xining: mTsho-sngon mi-rigs dpe-
krung-khang, 1979.
Mi-'gyur rDo-rje and Mig-dmar Tshe-ring. 'INga-bsdus sna-tshogs', in Bod-kyi rtsis-rig
kun-'dus chen-mo, vol. 2, pp. 25–73.
dMar-ston Jo-smon, dMar-ston stag-mgo. Also written as dMar-chung stag-mgo, this
text focuses on the elaborate method of divination on obstacle years utilising
360 divination pebbles. Potala archive, Lhasa.
Tshul-khrims rGyal-mtshan, 'dPal dus-kyi 'khor-lo ji-ltar dar-tshul brgyud-pa'i lo-
rgyus-dang bcas-pa skal-bzang rna-ba'i dga'-ston', in Bod-kyi rtsis-rig kun-
'dus chen-mo, vol. 1, pp. 20–282.
‘dPal dbyangs-'char-ba'i rtsis-rigji-ltar dar-ba'i lo-rgyus blo-gsal dgas'-
byed', in Bod-kyi rtsis-rigs kun-'dus chen-mo, vol. 1, pp. 429–472.
Zhang, Khog-don gsal-sgron. A commentary on the legendary origins and
transmission of elemental divination. Potala archive, Lhasa.
Zhus-chen Tshul-khrims Rin-chen (1697–1774), bsTan-'gyur dkar-chag. Lhasa: Bod-
ljongs mi-rigs dpe-skrun-khang, 1985. See also Martin, no. 281.
Yum-pa,‘rGya-rtsis bod-du dar-tshul cung-zad bshad-pa shel-dkar me-long’, in
Bod-kyi rtsis-rig kun-"dus chen-mo, vol. 1, pp. 548–574.
‘Bod-kyi gna'-rabs rtsis-rig-gi lo-rgyus nya-gro-dha-yi sa-bon', in Bod-kyi
rtsis-rig kun-'dus chen-mo, vol. 1, pp. 525–547.
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī (1654–1715), 'Byung-rtsis man-ngag zla-ba'i 'od-zer (English title:
Moonbeams: An Esoteric Instruction on Elemental Divination). Sman-rtsis
Spendzod 82 (1976), Lhasa xylo edition, 1981; republished in Bod-kyi rtsis-rig
kun-'dus chen-mo, vol. 3, pp. 486-516. Schuh, no. 34. Complete translation in
the present work. See also P. Cornu, Tibetan Astrology.
Nyin-byed snang-ba (English title: Illuminating Sun). Lhasa: Bod-ljongs mi-
rigs dpe-skrun-khangs, 1983. Schuh, no. 32.
gSang-bdag dgongs-rgyan (English title: Ornament of the Intention of the Lord of
Secrets) in Dudjom Rinpoche (ed.), Rnying-ma bka'-ma rgyas-pa, vol. 32.
Kalimpong, 1982.
gSang-bdag zhal-lung (English title: Oral Transmission of the Lord of Secrets) in
Dudjom Rinpoche (ed.), Rnying-ma bka'-ma rgyas-pa, vols 33–34. Kalimpong,
1982.
Sha-bo Tshe-ring (ed.), Bu-ston-gyi skar-rtsis phyogs-bgrigs. Lanzhou: Gansu mi-rigs
dpe-skrun-khang, 1992.
ston.
4. Indigenous Tibetan texts
Authors' dates are given for reference where known.
Kah-thog Si-tu Chos-kyi rGya-mtsho (1880–1925), mDo-khams-dang rgya-nag yun-nan
ri-bo bya-rkang sogs gnas-skor 'ga'-la phyin-pa'i lam-yig 'khrul-snang-las sbyong
gsal ba'i a-dar-sha. Republished in gNas-yig phyogs='grig, pp. 566–607.
Chengdu: Sichuan Nationalities Publishing House, 1998.
Karma Nges-legs bsTan-'dzin (fl. 18th century), Nyer-mkho'i bum-bzang. Xylo, 20
folios. Schuh, no. 36.
Mun-sel nyi-ma nyer-mkho'i 'dod-pa 'jo-ba'i bum-bzang. Xylo, 163 folios. Schuh,
no. 35.
gSer-gyi thur-ma. Xylo, 5 folios. Schuh, no. 37.
Karmapa Rang-"byung rDo-rje (1284-1339), rTsis-kun bsdus-pa (English title:
Summation of All Astrological Systems). Xylo, 27 folios. Schuh, no. 26.
Kun-bzang Blo-gros, ‘Byung-rtsis man-ngag zla-ba'i 'od-zer-gyi lhan-thabs rgyu-
skar phreng-ba', in Bod-kyi rtsis-rig kun-'dus chen-mo, vol. 3, pp. 517–712.
Klong-chen Rab-'byams-pa (1308–63), Phyogs-bcu mun-sel (English title: Dispelling the
Darkness of the Ten Directions), in Dudjom Rinpoche (ed.), Rnying-ma bka'-ma
rgyas-pa, vol. 26; I-Tib-248. Paro: Ngodup, 1975; and xylo edition, sDe-dge
sPar-khang. English trans. by G. Dorje, “The Guhygarbhatantra and its
xivth Century Commentary Phyogs-bcu mun-seľ. Unpublished PhD Thesis,
London University, 1987.
Jam-mgon Kong-sprul Blo-gros mTha'-yas (1813-99), Rin-chen gter-mdzod (English
title: Store of Precious Treasure). Available from sDe-dge sPar-khang in the
now restored dPal-spung xylo edition (71 vols); also in an expanded
reproduction of the mTshur-phu xylo edition. 111 vols. Paro: Ngodrup and
Sherap Drimey, 1976. Catalogues to both editions have been published.
- Shes-bya kun-khyab mdzod. Šatapitaka Series. Sarasvati Vihar, New Delhi, vol.
80 (1970), I-Tib 77-913514 (photo-offset of xylo edition). Also three-volume
typeset edition; Beijing: Mi-rigs dpe-skrun-khangs, 1982.
'Jam-dbyangs Chen-po Don-grub 'Od-zer, rTsis-kyi gzhung-lugs chen-mo (English title:
Great Textual Tradition of Astrology). NL.
'Ju Mi-pham rNam-rgyal (1846-1912), The Collected Works of Mi-pham Rin-po-che
(Tib. Mi-pham gsung-'bum). Xylo, 26 vols. sDe-dge sPar-khang. Also re-
edited and republished by Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche (Kathmandu, 1990); and
partially republished by Sonam Topgyay Kazi (Gangtok, 1975 onwards).
This collection includes a number of works on astrology (skar-rtsis), on which
see Schuh, nos 46–53.
Kun-gzigs dbyangs-'char chen-mo shel-gyi me-long. Sataun, HP: Getse Tulku
Kunga Lodoy, 1969.
sNyan-grong-pa, dPag-bsam ljon-shing. NL.
gSal-byed shun-Ipags 'grel-pa ljon-shing mdzes-rgyan gsal-ba'i me-long rin-chen
phreng-ba. A commentary on dPag-bsam ljon-shing concerning divinations
pertaining to marriage. NL.
Dalai Bla-ma V (1617–82), Ngag-dbang blo-bzang rgya-mtsho, sTsis skar-nag-las
brtsams-pa'i dris-lan nyin-byed dbang-po'i snang-ba. Xylo, 56 folios. Schuh, no.
28.
Dus-rams-pa 'Chi-med bDe-ba (fl. 16th century), Lag-len nor-bu phreng-ba (English
title: Practical Implementation entitled Garland of Gems). Nl.
Dol-po-pa Shes-rab rGyal-mtshan (1292–1361), INga-bsdus-kyi lag-len ma-bu (English
title: Practical Implementation of the Five Combined Calculations: Mother and
Son). In Collected Works of Kun-mkhyen Dolpopa. Bodhnath: Jamyang
Khyentse's Monastery, 1988.



424
The White Beryl
Sangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho (1655–1705), Baidūrya dkar-po (English title: White Beryl
Treatise). Lhasa xylo edition, 633 folios (1909) and sDe-dge xylo edition (18th
century). The latter republished in typeset form (2 vols), Beijing: Krung-go'i
bod-kyi shes-rig dpe-skrun-khang, 1996–97. Schuh, no. 29.
Bai-dkar bu-yig gshin-rtsis khra-ma'i dper-brjod gnad-bsdus. M/s dbu-med. 6
folios, contained in Bai-dkar dper-brjod gnas-bsdus, Potala archive, Lhasa.
Baidūrya sngon-po (English title: Blue Beryl Treatise). 2 vols. Lhasa: Bod-ljongs
mi-rigs dpe-skrun-khangs, 1982. Summarised in Y. Parfianovich, G. Dorje
and F. Meyer, Tibetan Medical Paintings. London: Serindia, 1992.
dGa'-ldan chos-'byung baidūya gser-po (English title: Yellow Beryl History of the
Ganden Tradition). Beijing: Krung-go bod-kyi shes-rig dpe-skrun-khang,
1989. See also Martin, no. 240.
So-sbrang-thar Gya-mtsho (ed.), Gro-tshang sa-cha'i bag-ston-gyi cho-ga me-tog tshom-
bu. Xining: mesho-sngon mi-rigs dpe-skrun-khang, 1985.
Shangs-pa sMon-lam 'Khrul-pa-che (disc.), gSal-sgron-ma dag-rtsis-kyi rgyud (English
title: Tantra of Accurate Divination from the Mother Cycle of the Clarifying Lamp).
A subdivision of the sKu-rgyud snang-gsal sgron-me. Potala archive, Lhasa. See
also under 'Jam-pa'i dbyangs.
Lha-mo Tshul-khrims, Nag-rtsis rdel-'grem 'bras-bshad. Lanzhou: Gansu mi-rigs pe-
krungs-khangs, 1995.
Lha-btsun Nam-mkha''Jigs-med (b. 1597) (disc.), Ri-bo bsangs-mchod, derived from
the Rig-'dzin srog-sgrub cycle. 2 vols. 1-Tib 80-900958. Gangtok: Dzongsar
Chhentse Labrang, 1980.
0-rgyan Gling-pa (c. 1323–60) (disc.), Thang-yig (English title: Injunctions of
Padmasambhava). Xylo. Leh, Ladakh. I-Tib-430. Typeset in Chengdu:
Sichuan mi-rigs dpe-skrun-khangs, 1987. French transl. by G.C. Toussaint,
Le Dict de Padma, Padma thang yig. Ms de Lithang. Bibliothèque de l'Institut
de Hautes Etudes Chinoises, vol. 3. Paris: Libraire Ernest Leroux, 1933.
English trans, from the French by K. Douglas and G. Bays, The Life and
Liberation of Padmasambhava. 2 vols. Emeryville, California: Dharma
Publications, 1978.
Unknown authorship, Gab-pa'i snying-gzer. A commentary on sDong-po kun-'dus,
recommended by Lo-chen Dharmaśrī for its detailed predictions on obstacle
years.
"Grel-pa thig-le nag-po (English title: Commentary entitled Black Seminal Point).
A commentary on the Chinese method of pebble distribution for the
divination of obstacle years. Potala archive, Lhasa.
- Dar-gud mig-tshags. A commentary containing predictions of growth and
decline in relation to natal horoscope. Potala archive, Lhasa.
gDon-'dzin bgegs-kyi spu-gri. A commentary on divinations pertaining to ill-
health, in which the animal signs and aspects of growth and decline are
juxtaposed. Potala archive, Lhasa.
'Phrul-gyi mig-tshags. The primary source for the Thirty Chinese and Tibetan
computational charts. Potala archive, Lhasa.
Bor-rde rang-rgyal (English title: Auto-commentary on Deployed Divination
Pebbles). NL.
Man-ngag sbas-pa gsal-byed (English title: Clarification of the Concealed
Instructions). A commentary on Svarodaya divination. NL.
- Me-ba gsal-ba'i me-long. A commentary on the attributes associated with the
nine numeric squares. NL.
- Rin-chen 'gro-lam. A reputedly extant commentary on marriage ceremonies.
Dorje, G., 'The Guhyagarbhatantra and its xivth Century Commentary Phyogs-bcu
mun-sel'. Unpublished PhD Thesis, London University, 1987.
“The Nying-ma Interpretation of Commitment and Vow', in The Buddhist
Forum, vol. 11, 1991, pp. 71-95.
Tibet Handbook, with Bhutan (2nd ed.). Bath: Footprint Handbooks, 1999.
and M. Kapstein (trans.), The Nyingma School of Tibetan Buddhism: Its
Fundamentals and History. Boston: Wisdom Publications, 1991.
and G. Coleman, The Complete Tibetan Book of the Dead. Penguin,
forthcoming
Dowman, K., The Sacred Life of Tibet. San Francisco: Thorsons, 1997.
Guenther, H.V. (trans.), Jewel Ornament of Liberation. London: Rider, 1959.
Henning, E., 'Fundamentals of the Tibetan Calendar', in Tibetan News Review,
vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 13–17. London, 1980.
Hopkins, J., Meditation on Emptiness. London: Wisdom Publications, 1983.
Kloetzli, R., Buddhist Cosmology. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidas, 1983.
Lama Rinchen Puntsok, A. Mandelbaum, and Lodro Palmo (trans.), The Preliminary
Practice of the New Treasure of Dudjom. New York: Yeshe Nyingpo, 1984.
Mani, V., Purāņic Encyclopaedia. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidas, 1984.
Martin, D., Tibetan Histories. London: Serindia Publications, 1997
Mostaert, A., Manual of Mongolian Astrology and Divination. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1969.
Napper, E., Dependent Arising and Emptiness. London/Boston: Wisdom Publications,
1989.
Nebesky-Wojkowitz, see de Nebesky-Wojkowitz.
Norbu, Namkha'i, Drung, Dreu and Bon. Dharamsala: Library of Tibetan Works and
Archives, 1995.
Padmakara Translation Committee (trans.), The Words of My Perfect Teacher.
San Francisco: Harper Collins, 1994.
Parfianovich, Y., G. Dorje and F. Meyer, Tibetan Medical Paintings. 2 vols. London:
Serindia Publications, 1992.
Pruden, L. (trans. from French of L. de La Vallée Poussin), Abhidharmakośa-bhāsyam.
Berkeley: Asian Humanities Press, 1988.
Ruegg, D.S., The Literature of the Madhyamaka School of Philosophy in India.
Wiesbaden: Otto Harrasowitz, 1981.
Schlagintweit, E., Le bouddhisme au Tibet: Calendriers et tables astrologiques. Annales du
Musée Guimet, vol. 3, 1898.
Schuh, D., Untersuchungen zur Geschichte der Tibetischen Kalenderrechnung.
Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner Verlag, 1973.
– Tibetische Handschriften und Blockdruke sowie Tonbandaufnahmen Tibetischer
Erzahlungen, vol. 5. Weisbaden: Franz Steiner Verlag, 1973
Snellgrove, D., The Nine Ways of Bon. Boulder: Prajñā Press, 1980 (reprint).
Snodgrass, A. The Symbolism of the Stūpa. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidas, 1992.
Thurman, R., and D. Weldon, Sacred Symbols: The Ritual Art of Tibet. New York:
Sotheby's, 1999.
Tulku Thondup Rinpoche, Hidden Teachings of Tibet. London: Wisdom Publications,
1986.
Vajranatha and L. Klapecki, Tibetan Astrological Calendar and Almanac: 1977–79.
Kathmandu: Kalacakra Publications, 1978.
Waddell, L.A., The Buddhism of Tibet or Lamaism. Cambridge, 1958.
Wilhelm, R., I Ching, The Book of Changes (trans. C.F. Baynes). New Jersey: Princeton
University Press, 1967.
Williams, P., Mahāyāna Buddhism. London: Routledge, 1989.
Xiao Ji, Cosmologie et divination dans la Chine ancienne: le compendium des cinq agents.
(Waxing dai). Trans. and annotation M. Kalinowski. Paris: Ecole français de
l'Extrême Orient, 1991.
Zhong Xin and Wei Lingwen, Wutaishan. China: Cultural Relics Publishing House,
1984 and 1992.
NL.
-
Rin-chen rgya-mtsho (English title: Ocean of Gemstones). A commentary on
Svarodaya divination. Nl.
Rin-chen spungs-pa. A commentary on the kham-yu divination of the wedding
date. NL.
gSang-ba kun-'dus (English title: Gathering of All Secrets). NL.
gSang-ba yang-tig (English title: Further Point of Secrets). A commentary on
natal horoscope. NL.
5. Works in other languages
Bareau, A., ‘La Date du Nirvāṇa'. Journal Asiatique (1953), pp. 27–52.
Basham, A.L., The Wonder That Was India. 3rd ed. London: Sidgwick & Jackson,
1967.
Bechert, H., The date of the Buddha reconsidered', in Indologica Taurinensia,
pp. 29–36. Turin, 1982.
Beyer, S., The Cult of Tārā. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1978.
Chu, W.K., and W.A. Sherrill, The Astrology of I Ching. London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul, 1976.
Cornu, P., Tibetan Astrology (trans. H. Gregor). Boston: Shambhala, 1997.
de Nebesky-Wojkowitz, R., Oracles and Demons of Tibet. Gratz: Akademische Druck-u.
Verlagsanstalt, 1975.
de Saussure, L., Le Cycle des douze animaux’, in Journal Asiatique, Jan./March,
1920.
Dil-'go mkhyen brtse Rin-po-che, The Wish-fulfilling Jewel(trans. Konchog Tenzin).
Boston: Shambhala, 1988.



425
Index of proper names
Index of proper names
Phonetic transcriptions are given in square brackets.
Aksobhya Buddha, 48
Amitābha Buddha, 48
Amitāyus, 107
Amoghasiddhi Buddha, 48
Anavatapta Lake (ma-pham mtsho), 19
Āryadevī, 217-18
Avalokiteśvara, 48, 50–51, 158, 329–30
dKar-sham [Karsham, geomantic spirit], 122–3, 353
Dol-po-pa Shes-rab rgyal-mtshan (Dolpopa Sherab Gyeltsen], 15-16
dPa'-bo gTsug-lag 'Phreng-ba (Pawo Tsuklak Trengwa], 16
dPal-mgon Phrin-las-pa (Palgon Trin-le], 16
dPal-spungs [Pelpung], 20
Duke Tan of Zhou, 11
Dum-pa rGya-zhang-grom [Dumpa Gyazhangtrom], 54, 57
Dur-len (Durlen], 128, 135–7
Dus-rams Don-grub Kun-dga' (Duram Dondrub Kunga], 59
Dus-rams-pa 'Chi-med bDe-ba (Durampa Chi-me Dewa], 16, 20
Dus-tshod bla-mkhyen (Dutso Lakhyen, geomantic spirit], 135
Dus-tshod sa-rgyal bdun (Dutso Sagyel Dun, geomantic spirits], 135
E-vam bzang-po [Evam Zangpo] see Kun-dga' phan-bde rgya-mtsho
Four Guardian Kings (Caturmahārājakāyika), 40
Fu Xi (sPa-hu hshi-dhi, emperor), 11, 16
Ba-dan ser-po (Baden Serpo, geomantic spirit], 125, 128, 135–7
Bag-ma'i lha-'dre dgu (Bagme Lhadregu], 217-18
'Bar-ba Tshom-tshom [Barwa Tsomtsom], 55
Bar-gyi khyab-'jug ra-hu (Bargyi Kyabjuk Rahu, geomantic spirit], 128
bDe-ba-len (Dewalen], 55
bDe-legs Gar-dbang Phun-tshogs (Delek Garwang Puntsok], 58
Be-sna (lag-chen) [Bena Lakchen, geomantic spirit], 125, 127–32
Bhan-tsa nag-po [Bantsa Nagpo], 56
Bhila-shod (Bilasho], 57
Bla-dngos (Lango, geomantic spirit], 127
Bla-ma mKhas-grub-pa (Lama Khedrubpa], see mKhas-dbang Nor-bzang
rGya-mtsho
Bla-mkhyen pha'u (Lakhyen Pawu, geomantic spirit], 122–6
Bo-dong-pa Yon-tan Blo-gros [Bodongpa Yonten Lodro], 16
Brag-srin (Draksin), 217–18
Brag-srin dmar-mo [Draksin Marmo, geomantic spirit], 171
Brahmā, 16, 49, 54, 57, 204
Brahmāņa Kapila, 54, 57
Bram-ze-ma [Bramzema], 57
Bran-pha Padma (Drenpa Pema], 56
'Bro-gnyer brTan-pa (Dronyer Tenpa], 55
brTan-ma (bcu-gnyis) (twelve goddesses of the snow-peaks), 21, 274, 277, 296, 373
'Brug-lha (Druklha, geomantic spirit], 120, 127, 129–32, 353
'Brug-sngon [Drukngon, geomantic spirit], 127, 129–32
bSam-yas [Samye], 57
bSas-khang (Sekhang, geomantic spirit], 128–32
bSod-nams dPal-'byor of rTse-dong [Tsedong Sonam Peljor], 11, 18-19,59
Buddha, 15, 19, 48–51, 296, 329–30. See also Śākyamuni Buddha
Buddhas of the Three Times (dus-gsum sangs-rgyas), 54,
Bus-pa rta-bdud (Bupa Tadu, geomantic spirit], 123, 128, 133–7
Bu-ston Rin-chen-grub (Buton Rinchendrub], 15
Bya byung-ka (Ja Jungka, geomantic spirit], 135–7
Bya-khyung ka-ru (Jakhyung Karu, geomantic spirit], 124, 128, 135–7
Bya dmar-mo (Ja Marmo, protector of the west), 110–11
Byams-chen grags-pa (Jamchen Drakpa], 56
Byang-pa Lhun-ldings-pa rNam-rgyal (Jangpa Lhundingpa Namgyel], 17
Byang-pa rNam-rgyal Grags-bzang (Jangpa Namgyel Drakzang], 16
Byi-dur (Jidur, geomantic spirit], 126, 128
Byi-lam (Jilam, geomantic spirit], 125, 136
Byi-lam phag-mgo (Jilam Pago, geomantic spirit], 127, 129–32
Byi-lam sngon-mo (Jilam Ngonmo, geomantic spirit], 127–32, 353
Byi-stag skya-bo (Jitak Kyawo, protector of the east), 110–11
Byis-pa rta-bdud (Jipa Tadu], see Bus-pa rta-bdud
'Byug sngon-mo (Yuk Ngonmo, protector of the south], 110–11
Gab-pa'i lha/sa-bdag bcu-gnyis (Gape Lha/Sadag Chunyi, geomantic spirits],
123, 128, 133, 135, 137
Garga, 15
gCer-bu lag-rdum (Cherbu Lagdum, geomantic spirit], 128, 135–7
Gling Ge-sar (Ling Gesar], 21
Glo-bo Lo-tsā-ba Shes-rab Rin-chen (Lowo Lotsawa Sherab Rinchen], 16
gNam-gshed [Namshe, geomantic spirit], 128-132
gNam-gyi bya-khyung heng-phan (Namgyi Jakhyung Hengpen, geomantic
spirit], 128
gNam-gyi bya-ma gung-rgyal (Namgyi Jama Gungyel, geomantic spirit], 127
gNam-gyi gza'-chen Iha-rgod (Namgyi Zachen Lhago, geomantic spirit], 128
gNam-khyi nag pho-mo (Namkhyi Nagpomo, geomantic spirits], 123, 128, 133,
135
gNam-khyi nag-po [Namkhyi Nagpo, geomantic spirit], 157, 175–7, 201, 212,
222–3
gNam-mdzod (Namdzo, geomantic spirit], 128–32, 353
gNam-ri srong-btsan (Namri Songtsen], 16,55
gNam-thig ser-nag (drug) [Namtig Sernag Druk, geomantic spirits], 128, 137,
353
gNas-pa don-gnyis (Nepa Donyi, geomantic spirits], 120
gNod-sbyin brgyad (Nojin Gye], 397
gNyan-chen (Nyenchen, geomantic spirit], 120, 127, 129–32
gNyan-chen thang-lha [Nyangchen Tanglha], 92–4
gNyan-khra [Nyentra, geomantic spirit], 124, 126, 128, 135–7
gNyan-khra drug (stag/bya/sbrul) [Nyentra Druk, geomantic spirits], 128,
135–7
gNyan-ljang [Nyenjang, geomantic spirit], 124, 128, 137
'Gog-ku (Goku, geomantic spirit], 133, 135–7
'Grams-phye [Dramche, geomantic spirit], 185–7
Grol-bu (lha)-Inga (Drolbu Lhanga, geomantic spirits], 120, 127–8
gSang-bdag Phrin-las Lhun-grub (Sangdak Trin-le Lhundrub], 18
gSer-dbang (Serwang, geomantic spirit], 128–32
gShed-po dur-'debs (Shepo Durdeb, geomantic spirit], 123, 128, 133–7
gShen-rab (Shenrab], 48
gShin-gyi pho-rog (Shingyi Porog, geomantic spirit], 128, 133, 135–7
gShin-rje 'go (Shinje Go], 157
gShin-rje dmar-mo (Shinje Marmo], 217–18
gShin-rje zas-'brog (Shinje Zadrog, geomantic spirit], 123, 128, 133–7
gTer-bdag Gling-pa (Terdag Lingpa], 18,59
gTsang-gYugZher (Tsangyusher], 54-5
gTso-bo gser-mdzod ser-po [Tsowo Serdzo Serpo, geomantic spirit], 133, 353
gTsug-lag dPal-mgon 'Phrin-las [Tsuklak Palgon Trin-le], 58
Gua Yue Feng (Padma brTsegs-pa), 48, 50–51
Gyim-shad Nag-po (Gyimshe Nagpo], 55
gYo-med (Yo-me, geomantic spirit], 296
gYu-lo gNyags-ban Na-ra-ba (Yulo Nyagben Narawa], 58
gYu-mdzod sngon-mo (Yumdzo Ngonmo, geomantic spirit], 135, 353
gYu-sgra (Yudra], 54, 56
gYu-sher [Yusher], 57
gZa'-thog [Zatok, geomantic spirit], 135–7
gZig-mjug [Zigjuk, geomantic spirit], 126, 127–32
gZig-slog [Ziglok, geomantic spirit], 127, 129–32
Char-'bebs (Charbeb, geomantic spirit], 296
Chu-tshags (Chutsak, geomantic spirit], 128–32
Chos-rje Phun-tshogs dGe-dbang (Choje Puntsok Gewang], 59
Confucius, 11, 16,54,55
Cornu, Philippe, 20–21, 145
Cui Ye Feng (Ghe-'ude shan), 48, 50–52
Dahura Nag-po [Dahura Nagpo], see Pan-chen Da-hur Nag-po
Dalai Lama V, 16–18, 20, 54, 58, 353
Dar-chen dBar-gyi Thig-le [Dechen Bargyi Tigle], 57
Dar-chen Thig-le [Darchen Tigle], 55,57
'Dar-pa Lo-tsā-ba (Darpa Lotsawa], 17, 59
'Dar-lo sKad-gnyis sMra-ba [Darlo Kenyi Mawa], see 'Dar-pa Lo-tsā-ba
dBang-sdud sNying-po (Wangdu Nyingpo], 18,59
dByig-gnyen (Yignyen, emperor], 48
Devendra, 16, 326
dGe-bsnyen bSod-nams Tshe 'Dzin-pa (Genyen Sonam Tsedzinpa], 54, 59
dGra-lha drag-po [Dralha Drakpo], 157
Dharamsala, 20



426
The White Beryl
'Od-'bar (Obar], 296
'Od-ljang (Ojang], 296
Hal-khyi (nag-po) [Halkhyi Nagpo, geomantic spirit], 120, 122–6, 223, 353,
381–2
Hang-bu [Hangbu], 128–32
Hang-phan [Hangpen, geomantic spirit], 120, 122, 124–6, 353
Hang-phan ser-po bya-ra-ba [Hangpen Serpo Jarawa, geomantic spirit], 122,
124–6, 353
Hayagrīva, 16, 48, 50–51
He-thon (Heton, geomantic spirit], 126, 128, 136
Lha-Inga (Lhanga], 353
Lha-mo brgyad (Lhamo Gye], 296
Lhasa, 11-12, 17, 19–20
Lhasa Medical College, see sMan-rtsis-khang
Lhasa sMan-rtsis-khang (Lhasa Mentsikhang], see sMan-rtsis-khang
Lho-brag Mar-pa sPrul-mgo [Lhodrak Marpa Trulgo], 57
Li-byi nag [Lijinak, geomantic spirit], 353
Lo-chen Dharmaśrī (Lochen Dharmashri], 12, 15, 17–18, 140, 204, 351, 356,
360; quotations from, on lineage, 59; on preliminaries, 62–5, 67–70, 86-9,
91, 104, 108–10, 112, 114, 116–17; on natal horoscope, 143–4, 154, 158–60,
163, 165–6, 168–9, 174, 176; on marriage, 196, 198–9, 205–6, 208–9, 212,
214, 222–3; on obstacle years, 226, 228–9, 231, 247, 249, 255, 258–9; on
ill-health, 296, 299–300, 303, 305; on death, 308, 311-12, 317, 329, 336,
341, 345, 351, 354, 357; on computational charts, 360–61, 363–87;
on conclusion, 399
Lo-ma shi-ma-la [Loma Shimala], 56
Lords of the Three Enlightened Families (rigs-gsum mgon-po), 54
1To-phye [To-che, geomantic spirit], 120, 128–32, 137, 353
Lu-'go Bla-mkhyen Ngag-gi dbang-po (Lago Lakhyen Ngagiwangpo], 17, 54, 59
Indrabhadho, 55
'Jam-dbyangs Chen-po Don-grub 'Od-zer (Jamyang Chenpo Dondrub Ozer], 16
'Jam-mgon Kong-sprul [Jamgon Kongtrul], 15, 17
'Jam-sprul rgyal-ba'i rgya-mtsho (Jamtrul Gyelwei Gyatso], 49–51
Jayānanda, 16
Ji-kong 'phrul-rgyal [Jikong Trulgyel], 54
Ji-nong 'phrul-rgyal (Jinong Trulgyel], 54
Jin Xiu Feng (Rin-chen brTsegs-pa), 48, 50–51
Jincheng, queen, 16–17,55
Jing-ken, 54, 56
Jīvaka, 48
Jñānasattva (an emanation of Mañjughosa), 49–51
Jo-sras-che (Jo-se-che], 57
Jumla, 16
Pad-dkar Yid-bzhin dBang-po (Pekar Yizhin Wangpo], 16
Padma dkar-mo (Pema Karmo], 217
Padmākara, 19, 53–4,57
Padmasambhava, 21, 353. See also Padmākara
Pan-chen Da-hur Nag-po [Panchen Dahur Nagpo], 54–5,57,59
Pan-chen Khri-ma Mahā-yāna (Panchen Trima Mahayana], 56
Pan-chen Ra-hu dMar-po-che (Panchen Rahu Marpoche], 56–7, 59
Parinirmittavaśavartin (gzhan-'phrul dbang-gyur-ba), 46
Pe-har (Pehar], 62, 272, 274–5, 277, 322
Phan-gnod byed-pa'i lha brgyad (Peno Chepe Lha Gye], 49
'Phan-yul Bheravajra (Penyul Bheravajra], 58
'Phar-ba mgo-dgu (Parwa Gogu, geomantic spirit], 100, 353
Pho-brang lha zhe-Inga (Podrang Lha Zhenga], 123
Phrin-las-pa Phyogs-las rNam-rgyal (Trinlepa Chokle Namgyel], 16
Phug-pa Āryadeva (Phukpa Āryadeva], see Phug-pa Lhun-grub rGya-mtsho
Phug-pa Lhun-grub rGya-mtsho (Phukpa Lhundrub Gyatso], 15–16,58–9
Phug-pa Mi-nyag rGyal-mtshan dPal-bzang (Phukpa Minyak Gyeltsen Pelzang]
46,58–9
'Phung-sri rnga-mo [Pungsi Ngamo], 217
'Phung-sri rnga-mo nag [Pungsi Ngamonak], 217
Phur-bu (Purbu], 54–5
Phyug-po [Chukpo, geomantic spirit], 126, 128, 137
Phyva-sangs [Chasang],92
Pi-ling [Piling, geomantic spirit], 122–7, 129–32, 222
Pi-ling 'khor-chung [Piling Khorchung, geomantic spirit], 133
Pi-ling 'phar-ma [Piling Parma, geomantic spirit], 129–32
Potala Palace, see Red Palace of the Potala
Prajñāpāramitā, 107
Pu-de gong-rgyal (Pude Gongyel], 17
Ka-la ro-zan (Kalarozen, geomantic spirit], 123, 128, 133–7
Karabha, 15
Karma-pa Rang-byung rDo-rje [Karmapa Rangjung Dorje), 15-16
Karmasiddhi Utpala, 16
Ke-tshigs [Ketsik, geomantic spirit], 128–32
Khams Khra Dang-po (Khamtra Dangpo], 55–6
Khams-pa bha-yu chos-kyi rgyal (Khampa Bayu Chokyi Gyel], 56
Khams-pa Khra-bo (Khampa Trawo], 16, 46, 57–9
Khams-pa Ling-tsi (Khampa Lingtsi], 56
Khams-pa Lo-tsā gTsug-ston [Khampa Lotsa Tsukton], 54, 56
Khri-srong Ide'u btsan [Trisong Detsen], 55
'Khrul-gsal 'Degs-pa Ya-tsa-ba (Trulsel Degpa Yatsawa], 57
Khru-lu [Trulu, geomantic spirit], 353
Khu-shog mKhan-po (Khushog Khenpo], 56
Khyung-lhas gZhon-nu bSod-nams (Khyung-lhe Zhonu Sonam], 259
Khyung-nag (Śāk-dar) [Khyungak Shakdar], 16, 46, 57–8, 143–4
Khyung-po rDo-rje 'Bar-ba (Khyungpo Dorje Barwa], 56
Ki-kang (Kikang, geomantic spirit], 222
King Wan of Zhou, 11, 54
King You of Zhou, 54
Klu-bdud yul-bdag 'go (Ludu Yuldago, geomantic spirit], 157
Klu-bsen sbrul-mgo (Lusen Drulgo], 217-18
Klu-btsan dkar-ma (Lutsen Karma, geomantic spirit], 157
Klu-chen brgyad (Luchen Gye], 396
Klu-lcam dkar-mo'go (Lucham Karmogo, geomantic spirit], 131
Klu-gza' nag-mo (Luza Nagmo, geomantic spirit], 135—7
Ko-long sdom-pa'i lha bco-brgyad (Kolong Dompe Lha Chobgye], 49
Kong-tse 'phrul-(gyi) rgyal-(po) [Kongtse Trulgyel], see Confucius
Ku-ku (Kuku, geomantic spirit], 128, 135–7
Kulika Durjaya, 15
Kun-'byung a-lo-che [Kunjung Aloche], 56
Kun-dga', the councillor (mdun-na 'don-pa kun-dga'), 18, 53–4, 59
Kun-dga' phan-bde rgya-mtsho [Kunga Pende Gyatso], 18,59
Kung-kung (Kungkung, geomantic spirit), 345, 348
Kun-tu len [Kuntulen], 55
Kurukullā, 53
Ma-bdud bcu-gsum (Madu Chuksum, geomantic spirits], 229
Ma-gros (Madro), 92
Mahābala, 204
Mahādeva (Śiva), 16, 20
Mahārājadeva, 55
Mahāyānasūtra, 55
Mal-ze gLan (Melzelen], 58
Manibhadra, 48
Mañjughosa, 11, 16, 21, 46, 48–57, 59, 66–7, 120, 199, 329–30
Mañjughoșatīkşņa (emanation of Mañjughoșa), 49–51
Mañjunātha (emanation of Mañjughosa), 48
Mañjuśrī, 48. See also Mañjughoșa
Mañjuśrīnātha (emanation of Mañjughosa), 49–51, 54
Mañjuvajra, 48
Mar-ston (Jo-smon) [Marton Jomon], 140, 258–9
Maudgalyāyana, 48, 50–51
mChe-ba-can (Chewachen, geomantic spirit], 128, 133, 135-7
mDangs-ldan (Dangden, geomantic spirit], 296
Me-long rDo-rje (Melong Dorje], 57
Mes'ag tshom (Meyaktsom], 55
mGon-po gYul-bzlog [Gonpo Yuldok], 365
Mi-nyag Dar-'dzin/'Dzin-dar (Minyak Dardzin/Dzindar], 56
Ming-gi zhang-lha [Mingi Zhaklha, geomantic spirit], 148
Mi-pham rNam-rgyal of'Ju [Ju Mipam Namgyel], 16
mKhas-dbang bKra-shis rTsis-rig smra (Khewang Tashi Tsirikma], 59
mKhas-dbang Nor-bzang rGya-mtsho [Khewang Norzang Gyatso], 15,58
mKhas-mchog dPal-gyi Senge (Khechog Palgyi Senge],58–9
mKhas-pa Ber-sngon-can [Khepa Berngonchen], 56
Monyul, 329–30
Mt Sumeru, 46, 133
Mt Wu Tai Shan, 11, 22 (plate), 48–53, 57
mTsho-sngon (Tsongon, geomantic spirit], 135
mTshungs-med Sangs-rgyas Blo-gros (Tsung-me Sangye Lodro], 16,58
mTshur-phu (Tsurphu], 16, 20,
Mu-tig Zur-phud Inga-ma (Mutik Zurpu Ngama], 57
Myos-kyi ston-pa byad (rgyad) yod-cha (Nyokyi Tonpa-je], 54, 58
Ra-bla mkhyen (Ralakhyen], 55
Ra-hu dMar-po [Rahu Marpo], see Pan-chen Ra-hu dMar-po-che
Rāhula, 133
Ral-can [Relchen], 48, 50–51
Rang-rta (Rangta, geomantic spirit], see Se-ba rang-rta
Ras (Ral) Bheravajra [Re Bheravajra], 57–8
Ratnasambhava Buddha, 48
rDo-rje 'bar-ma (Dorje Barma], 217
Red Palace of the Potala, 11, 17
rGan-rgon (Gengon, geomantic spirit], 127, 129–32, 353
rGram-gyi sa-bdag 'phye-ba (Dramgyi Sadak Chewa, geomantic spirit], 128
rGya-ston Dir-ba (Gyaton Dirwa], 58
rGya-ston Karma Kun-mkhyen (Gyaton Karma Kunkhyen], 59
rGya-gYu bzang (Gyayuzang], 56
rGyal-mo bzhi (Gyelmozhi, geomantic spirits], 127, 129–32
rGyal-po btsan-bdud 'go (Gyelpo Tsendugo, geomantic spirit], 157
rGyal-po mtshon-thogs (Gyelpo Tsontok, geomantic spirit], 123, 128, 133–7
rGyal-sras bs Tan-pa'i nyi-ma (Gyelse Tenpei Nyima], 59
Rigs-'dzin gZhon-nu gDong-drug (Rigzin Zhonu Dondruk], 54, 58
Rin-chen 'bar-ma (Rinchen Barma], 217–18
rNam-thos (Namto, geomantic spirit], 128–32
rNgam-pa (Ngampa, geomantic spirit], 127, 129–32
rNga-zor dmar-po (Ngazor Marpo, geomantic spirit], 127, 129–32, 353
rNo-dbal-ma [Nowelma, geomantic spirit], 296
rTsang-tsid (Tsangtsi, geomantic spirit], 127, 129–32
Rus-sbal (ser-po) [Rubal Serpo, protector of the north], 110–11, 123, 128,
135–7
Nad-bdud mgo-gcod byi-ba [Nedu Gocho Jiwa, geomantic spirit], 123, 128, 133–7
Nāgarāja Takşaka, 54, 56
Nāgārjuna, 48
Nag-mo dgu-skor (Nagmo Gukor, geomantic spirits], 123
Nag-mo khyo-med [Nagmo Khyo-me, geomantic spirit], 123, 128, 132, 133–7
Nag-po [Nagpo], 55
Nag-po dgu-skor (Nagpo Gukor, geomantic spirits], 137
Nag-smug klu-sman 'go [Nagmuk Lumengo, geomantic spirit], 157
Nalanda Monastery, 'Phan-yul, 12
Nal-bu [Nelbu, geomantic spirit], 127, 129–32
Nang-lha [Nanglha, geomantic spirit], 127, 129–32, 353
Ne-le'i mi-pa bhalo [Nele Mipabalo], 57
New Translation Schools, 11
Ngag-dbang Kun-dga' bKra-shis (Ngawang Kunga Tashi], 18
Ngag-dbang Kun-dga' Blo-gros [Ngawang Kunga Lodro], 18,59
Ngan-phyogs Inga-bcu [Ngenchok Ngabchu, geomantic spirits], 127, 137
Nges-legs bstan-'dzin (Ngelek Tendzin], 16
Nye-bar-len [Nyebarlen], 55
Lang-tsho mdong-yags (Langtso Dongyak], 54, 56
Las-kyi srin-mo [Lekyi Sinmo], 217-18
1Ce-mur-ba (Chemurwa], 54-5
IDum-po Don-grub dBang-rgyal (Dumpo Dondrub Wangyel], 16, 59
Lha-bran 'khor-bu (Lhadren Khorbu, geomantic spirit], 127
Lha-bzang Qan (Lhazang Khan], 17
Lha-chen (Lhachen, geomantic spirit], 127, 129–32
Lha-dgu (Lhagu], 353
Sa-bdag 'jab-rtsegs [Sadak Jabtsek, geomantic spirit], 135
Sa-bdag se-ba gdan-'ding (Sadak Sewa Dending, geomantic spirit], 122–3, 353
Sa-dmag (Samag, geomantic spirit], 127, 129–32, 353
Sa-khyi dud-kha-pho (Sakhyi Dukhapo, geomantic spirit], 127, 129–32
Sa-khyi nad-mo tho-lum-mo (Sakhyi Nemo Tolumo, geomantic spirit], 127,
129–32
Śākyamuni Buddha, 46, 47 (plate), 48, 50–51, 55, 329–30
Samantabhadra (Buddha), 46
Samantabhadra (Bodhisattva), 48, 50–51
Śambhala, 15
Samudravijaya, 15



427
Index of proper names
U
Umādevī, 16
Upāsaka Licchāvi, 48, 50–51
Usnīşa Sugata, 329–30
Vādīsimha (emanation of Mañjughoșa), 49–51
Vairocana Buddha, 48
Vairocana (translator), 56
Vaiśravana, 187
Vajrakīla, 391
Vajrapāņi, 48, 50-51, 208, 282–3, 329–30
Vajrasattva, 329–30
Vang-ging dmar-po (Wanging Marpo, geomantic spirit], 122–6
Vang-khyi (Wangkhyi, geomantic spirit], 127, 129–32
Vang-the 'phrul-gyi rGyal-po (Wangte Trulgyi Gyelpo], 54
Vasudharā (nor-lha), 319
Vijaya, 49, 53, 54
Vimala (emanation of Mañjughosa), 49–51
Sangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho (Sangye Gyatso], 11, 15–19, 40, 54, 58–9, 140, 205, 296,
308, 335, 353, 360, 363
Sa-'og rim-dgu'i sa-bdag (Sawaok Rimgu Sadak], 120
Śāriputra, 48, 50–51
Sa-skya (Sakya], 11, 12, 18–20,59
Sa-sman [Samen, geomantic spirit], 127, 129–32
Sa-yi byi-lam (Sayi Jilam, geomantic spirit], 127, 129–32
Sa-yi lha-mo bstan-ma (Sayi Lhamo Tenma, geomantic spirit], 127, 129–32, 353
Sa'i 'phung-byed (Sayi Pungje, geomantic spirit], 135
Sa-yi 'phung-gyed nag-mo (Sayi Pungje Nagmo, geomantic spirit], 128
sBal-te (Balte, geomantic spirit], 122, 123, 353
sBra-lha phyir-'gro [Dralha Chirgo, geomantic spirit], 127, 129–32
sDe-dge [Derge], 19
sDom-khyi (Domkhyi, geomantic spirit], 127, 129–32
Se-ba bla-mkhyen (Sewa Lakhyen, geomantic spirit], 122
Se-ba rang-rta (Sewa rangta, geomantic spirit], 120, 122, 353
Se-bdud (Sedu, geomantic spirit], 128, 135–7
Se-bya (Seja, geomantic spirit], 120, 122–6, 353
Se-byi [Seji, geomantic spirit], 120, 122, 124–6, 353
Se-lo sa-'chag kungs-myul (Selo Sachak Kung-nyul, geomantic spirit], 122–6, 353
Se-lo sa-'phyag (Selo Sachak, geomantic spirit], 122–6
Se-rgyal (rje-blon) bcu-gcig (Segyel Jelon Chuchik, geomantic spirits], 122–3, 353
Se-ston khri (Setontri), 54, 58
Se'u rta-khrid (Sewu Tatri, geomantic spirit], 122–6, 353
Se-shar (Seshar, geomantic spirit], 120, 122, 124–6, 353
Shang-pa sMon-lam 'Khrul-pa-che (Shangpa Monlam Trulpache], 57
Shangs-pa mDze-sngon (Shangpa Dzengon], 57
Shel-khang [Shelkhang, geomantic spirit], 128–32
Shes-rab bla-ma [Sherab Lama], 56
She'u Hūm-chen (Shewu Humchen], 54, 56
Sil-ma'i 'gog-ku lha Inga (Silme Goku Lhanga, geomantic spirits], 123
Si-tu Chos-kyi 'Byung-gnas [Situ Chokyi Jungne], 17
Six Sages (thub-pa drug), 48
skyed-byed (Kyeje, geomantic spirit], 296
Slob-dpon bSod-nams Grags-pa (Lopon Sonam Drakpa], 54, 59
sMan-rtsis-khang (Mentsikhang], Lhasa, 11-12, 17, 20, 140, 159, 197, 399
sMe-ba bla-mkhyen (Mewa Lakhyen, geomantic spirit], 123, 128, 133–7
sMe-ba rtsa-ba'i lha dgu (Mewa Tsawei Lhagu, geomantic spirits], 123
sMin-grol-gling [Mindroling], 15, 18, 20
sMon-'gro Pandita [Mondro Pandita], 16, 20, 133
sMug-mo'bum-gyi dpon-mo [Mugmo Bumgyi Ponmo, geomantic spirit], 274,
W
Wang Hai Feng (rDo-rje brtsegs-pa), 48, 50–51
Wencheng, queen, 16, 55
Yama (Dharmarāja], 48, 237, 326
Yang Wang Ling, 17
Yang-dag-len [Yangdaklen], 55
Yang-khol sa-bdag Inga (five spirit lords of further insistence), 133, 135
Yarlung Dynasty, 11
Ye Dou Feng (rGya-gram brtsegs-pa), 48–51
Ye-shes rgyal-ba (Yeshe Gyelwa], 54, 55
277
sNang-sel khrab-gyon [Nangsel Trab-gyon, geomantic spirit], 128, 135–7
sNang-srid lha-srin sde-brgyad [Nangsi Lhasin Degye], 46
sNgags-pa Lhun-grub dPa'-bo [Ngagpa Lhubdrub Pawo], 58
sNying-stod Yon-tan mGonpo [Nying to Yonten Gonpo], 17
Song Dynasty, 11
Śrī Mahā-yāna, 56
Sribs-kyi nag-drug [Sibkyi Nagdruk, geomantic spirits], 128–32, 137
Srid-gshed (Si-she, geomantic spirit], 127, 129–32
Srin 'bar-ma (Sinbarma], 217–8
Srong-btsan sgam-po [Songtsen Gampo], 16,55
sTag-dkar [Takar, geomantic spirit], 128–32
sTag-gzig sna-dus [Takzik Nadu, geomantic spirit], 123, 128, 133–7
Stūpas of Wu Tai Shan, 49–51
Ze-'u Kong-'phrul chung (Zewu Kongtrul-chung], 55
Zhag-gi bla-mkhyen (Zhaki Lakhyen, geomantic spirit], 133
Zhang (Zhang], 46,58
Zhang-zhung (Zhangzhung], 17, 48
Zhang-blon (Zhanglon, protector], 245
Zin-'phung (Zinpung, geomantic spirit], 122–7, 129–32, 222
Zla-ba Nag-po [Dawa Nagpo], 16, 57, 59
Zla-ba'i bla-mkhyen (Dawei Lakhyen, geomantic spirit], 127, 129–32
Zla-ba'i nag-mo dgu-skor (Dawei Nagmo Gukor, geomantic spirits), 128
Zla-bali tsang-kun (Dawei Tsangkun, geomantic spirit], 127, 129–32
Zla-ba'i se-rgyal bcu-gcig (Dawei Segyel Chuchik, geomantic spirits], 127,
129–32
Zla-dngos [Dango, geomantic spirit], 129–32, 353
Zla-grungs (Dadrung, geomantic spirit], 127, 129–32, 353
Zlum-po Chos-rje [Dumpo Choje], see lDum-po Don-grub dbang-rgyal
Zur-chen Chos-dbyings Rang-grol (Zurchen Choying Rangdrol], 16,54,58
Tang Dynasty, 11
Tārā, 329–30
Te-so (Teso, geomantic spirit], 122, 124–6, 353
Thab-lha se-shar (Tablha Seshar, geomantic spirit], 127–33, 135–7
The-grum [Tedrum, geomantic spirit], 120
The-khyem [Tekhyem, geomantic spirit], 120, 122, 124–6, 353
The-se [Te-se, geomantic spirit], 66–7, 120, 122, 124–6, 353
The-se 'grum-bu [Te-se Drumbu, geomantic spirit], 127, 129–32, 353
Thor-cog (Torchok], 55
Trāyatrimśa, 46, 53, 326
Tsa-ma-li [Tsamali], 56
Tsang-kun (Tsangkun, hidden geomantic spirit], 125, 128, 135–7
Tsang-kun, general [Tsangkun, geomantic spirit], 122–6
Tsang-kun, royal minister (Tsangkun, geomantic spirit], 122, 124–6, 353
Tsang-kun khyi-mgo [Tsangkun Khyigo, geomantic spirit], 122–6
Tsang-kun 'phye'o [Tsangkun Che'o, geomantic spirit], 122–6
Tshe-dbang (Tsewang, geomantic spirit], 128–32
Tshes-gnyan (Tsenyen, geomantic spirit], 133, 222
Tshes-gnyan ro-dgu [gTsenyen Rogu, geomantic spirit], 128, 135–7
Tshul-khrims rGyal-mtshan [Tsultrim Gyekltsen], 12
Tsong-kha-pa (Tsongkhpa], 353



428
The White Beryl
Subject index
amulet ( 'khor-lo, Skt. cakra), 21, 204, 208, 223, 354, 365, 367, 373, 376, 393-6
animal (realms of rebirth] (dud-'gro), 46, 241, 326, 330-33
animal signs, see year-signs
annual almanac (lo-tho), 20, 140
antigods (lha-ma-yin), 16, 49, 330–31, 333
Anurādhā (lha-mtshams; Iridis), 212. See also constellations
arhat (dgra-bcom-pa), 48
aspirational tradition (smon-lam lugs), 334-5
astrologer (rtsis-pa), 343–4, 347. See also diviner
astrology (skar-rtsis), 11-12, 15–18, 20, 59, 108, 145, 399; accurate system of
calendrical – (rnam-dag skar-rtsis), 15; practical – (byed-rtsis), 15; systematic
~ (grub-rtsis), 15
Asvinī (dbyugg-gu; Arietis beta), 305. See also constellations
auspicious coincidence (rten-'brel), 21, 213, 216, 219, 262
awareness (rig-pa), 280, 292–3, 365
awareness-holder (rig-'dzin), 365
bdud (malevolent force/demon, Skt. Māra), 48; ~ in natal horoscope; 188,~ in
obstacle years, 233; ~ in the hour of divination, 271–2, 285–6; ~ in ill-health,
299–300; ~ in death, 309, 320, 323, 336, 345; ~ in computational charts,
370–71, 374, 377–81, 384–7; hybrid bdud-btsan, 241, 262, 266, 268; pho-bdud,
246, 378; ma-bdud, 297, 319; mo-bdud/ bdud-mo, 301, 370–71, 378; ya-bdud,
241-4, 319; yas-kyi bdud, 297; rang-bdud, 246
bdun-zur (seventh-removed aspect), 87; in geomancy, 122–3: in natal horoscope,
186; in marriage, 200, 211, 213, 217, 222–3; in obstacle years, 229, 251,
258–9; in death, 309, 311, 315–16, 349–50, 353, 356
Bharaṇī (bra-nye; Arietis), 35, 212, 305. See also constellations
bodhisattva (byang-chub sems-dpa), 18, 46, 48, 50–51,54, 399
body element (lus), 68, 86; its origin, 53; thirty pairs of ~ (lus-kyi kha-srog sum-cu),
68, 69, 155; ~ of the years, 69; ~ of the months, days and hours, 90–91; ~ of
the sexagenary year cycle, 70–85; ~ of the divination subject (byed-yor), 280;
~in natal horoscope, 140–45, 154-5, 157, 159–60, 178–87;~ in marriage,
196–9, 208–9, 214, 216, 223; ~ in obstacle years, 226, 228, 242, 244, 248–9,
255, 257–9;~ in the hour of divination, 284–7;~ in ill-health, 296–300, 302,
305; ~ in death, 308, 310, 312, 314-17, 330–31, 341, 346–7, 349, 351, 356–7,
~in computational charts, 360–63, 384, 390–97
Bon divination, 11, 17;~ in natal horoscope, 179;~ in obstacle years, 255; ~ in the
hour of divination, 262–9, 274, 276–77; – in death, 310, 319–22, 334–5;
~ sūtras, 392; gShen-rab Bon tradition, 343–4, 366
Bon priests, 92; ~ in natal horoscope, 156–7, 167, in obstacle years, ~ 241–2, 245,
254, ~ in the hour of divination, 271–2,~ in death, 316–17, 322–3, 325, 334,
343–4, ~ in computational charts, 360, 365–6, 392; Phyva-bon priest, 312
Bon-po, 17, 21, 48, 62, 104, 330–31, 337, 341, 353
Brahmin (bram-ze), 158
'bri, 270, 314, 371–2, 397
bride (bag-ma), see nuptials
'Brog-ston ral-pa tradition, 143–4
bse-rags demons, 153–4
bse-stone, 253
bsen-(mo)(attachment spirits), 21, 92, 104; ~in natal horoscope, 149, 151, 157, 167;
~ in obstacle years, 241; ~ in the hour of divination, 262, 265, 267, 269–72,
274, 276, 285–6; ~ in death, 323; ~ in computational charts, 376–7
btsan (haunting spirits), 21, 62,92–94, 104; ~ in natal horoscope, 148–50, 157;
~ in obstacle years, 229, 241–4, 257; ~ in the hour of divination, 262–9,
271–2, 274–5, 277, 285–6; ~ in death, 319–20, 322–3; brag-btsan, 262, 264;
hybrid btsan-rgyal, 322
buddha-body (sku), 324–5; ~ of indestructible reality (rdo-rje lus), 390; ~ of actual
reality (chos-sku), 49; ~ speech and mind (sku-gsung-thugs), 55, 391
buddhas (sangs-rgyas), 20, 40; distinct attributes of the ~ (sangs-rgyas-kyi ma-'dres-
pa'i chos bco-brgyad), 49
buddha-speech (gsung), 324–5
Buddhism (nang-pa'i chos), 11, 16, 21, 48, 53, 69, 399; in natal horoscope, 167,
188–9;~ in death, 329–30
Buddhist (doctrine/practitioners/practice), 11, 17, 21, 53, 112; ~in natal
horoscope, 167, 179, 187; ~ in marriage, 223; ~ in obstacle years, 254–5; ~ in
the hour of divination, 262–9, 274–77; ~ in death, 310, 317, 319–25,334–5,
337, 341-4; ~ in computational charts, 364–5; ~ nun (btsun-mo), 393-4
Buddhist monks (ban-de), 92, 104, 156–7, 167, 241–2, 245, 271–2, 279–80, 292–3,
325, 329–31, 353, 360, 394
business, divinations concerning (tshong-rtsis), 290
Bya-dmar me-len star, 156
Byang-ston Padma tradition, 143-4
'byung-po (elemental spirits), 296, 368
bzhi-gshed (fourth-removed adversarial aspect), 87, 122, 128, 258–9, 309, 315–6,
356; preceding fourth-removed aspect (yar-bzhi), 349–50
charms (gto/ gzhug-gcod gto), 21;~ in natal horoscope, 162–3;~ in marriage, 202,
214, 216–7, 220, 222–3;~ in obstacle years, 228–9, 232, 257; ~ in death, 312,
345, 354, 356–7; in computational charts, 360, 363–4, 366–7, 370, 375–6,
380–83,386,392, 394-5
charnel grounds, eight (dur-khrod brgyad), 274
childbirth (byis-btsas), 360, 376–7; impact of father's current trigram and
coincidental actions on ~, 163–4; impact of mother's planetary luck aspects
on ~, 166–7; times of ~ inauspicious to parents or relatives, 169–70. See also
natal horoscope
Chinese divination (nag-rtsis), 18; ancient system of – (rgya-rtsis rnying-ma), 16–17,
142—3, 198–9, 223, 337; new method of ~ (rgya-rtsis gsar-ma), 17, 198–9, 223.
See also elemental divination
Chinese method of pebble distribution (rgya-nag rdel-skor), 257–8,351
classical sciences, major and minor (rig-gnas), 15
cloche (shang), 343–4, 365–6, 393
commitment (dam-tshig), 274, 277, 391; basic and ancillary ~,392
computational charts (skor-'go), thirteen ~ of Bal-mo lding-skor (bal-mo-lding-
skor), 19–20, 35, 388–97; thirty Chinese and Tibetan ~ (rgya-bod skor-'go sum-
cu), 19–20, 35, 358–87
conduct (spyod-pa), divinations based on, 292–3
consciousness (rnam-shes), 189, 353; eight aggregates of ~ (rnam-shes tshogs-
brgyad), 53
constellation(s), twenty-eight (rgyu-skar nyer-brgyad/ skar-ma), 15, 17, 19–20, 49,
53–4, 62, 64, 88, 108, 110; anthropomorphic depictions of the ~, 111 (plate); ~
of destiny (dbang-skar), 64-5; ~ names of the months derived from ~, 110;
four initial ~ (skar-'go bzhi), 349; twenty-seven lesser ~ (skar-chung), 110; ~ in
natal horoscope, 186; ~ in marriage, 194, 212–3, 222; ~ in ill-health, 296, 305;
~ in death, 308, 312, 321,324, 329, 336–8, 341, 345, 348–9,353–4; ~ in
computational charts, 380–81, 238, 241, 302, 303, 305
constitutional type(s): five (rus-khams Inga), 19, 49, 53, 64–5, 115–6, 190; earth ~
(kung-sa), 64–5, 204–5, 252-5, 309, 311, 336–7,341, 348; fire ~ (ji-me), 64–5,
204–5, 252–5, 309, 311, 336–7, 341, 348; iron ~ (gshang-lcags), 64-5, 204-5,
252–5, 309, 311, 336–8, 348; water ~ ('u chu), 64–5, 204–5, 252–5, 309, 311,
336–9,348; wood ~ (keg-shing), 64–5, 204–5, 252–5, 297–300, 309, 310–11,
336–9, 348; ~ in natal horoscope, 141-4, 165; ~ in marriage, 194, 196–7,
204–5; ~ in the hour of divination, 274–5;~ in death, 312, 326, 345, 349,
356–7; in computational charts, 390–97; multiples of nine based on ~ (rus-
khams dgu-mig), 249, 254–5
constitutional types, calculations based on: greater star (skar-chen), 87; lesser star
(skar-chung), 87, 218; enemy-relationship year (dgra-lo), 64–5, 141–4, 156,
310–11; identity/destiny-relationship year (dbang-lo), 64–5, 141-4, 156,
310–11; friend-relationship year (grogs-lo), 64-5, 141–4, 309, 310–11; greater
penalty year (chad-chen-gyi lo), 64–5, 141-4, 156, 310–11; lesser penalty year
(chad-chung lo), 64–5, 141-4, 156, 310–11; mother-relationship year (ma-lo),
64-5, 141–4, 156, 164, 310–11; son-relationship year (bu-lo), 64–5, 141-4,
156, 310-11
corpse(s) (ro-rigs), 274, 276, 282–3, 311–2, 323, 335–7, 341–2, 353–4, 356–7,
378–81; thirteen ~ types (ro-rigs bcu-gsum), 335–36; eleven ~ types (ro-rigs
bcu-gcig), 336; accoutrements and funeral procession of the ~ (ro-chas dang ro-
rdzongs), 312, 342–4; direction for ~ disposal (gshin-po'i phung-po gtong-rim),
128, 312, 353–7, 380–81
crossed-vajra (rdo-rje rgya-gram), 223, 314-5, 346, 384
dagger (phur-pa), 167, 205–7, 262, 264–5, 274, 276, 319, 342–4, 365–6, 384, 391;
~ of existence (srid-phur), 376–7; ~ of the lifespan (tshe-phur), 251, 369, 394
dākinī (mkha'-'gro –ma), 187, 365, 391
dal-yams plague, 301, 304
date (i.e. calendar day of the lunar month, tshes), 89, 296. See also day(s)
day(s), thirty (zhag sum-bcu/tshes nyi-ma), 19,64,89; destiny elements of the ~,
90–91; ~ calculated according to sectors of growth and decline, 90;
~ calculated in trigrams, 83; ~ calculated in association with tomb signs, 95,
266; ~ calculated in planets, 86;~ calculated in numeric squares, 77; doubled
~ (lhag), 89; omitted ~ (chad), 89; ~ in geomancy, 133–4; natal – (skyes-zhag),
140–41, 200, 210–11;~ in natal horoscope, 165; ~ in marriage, 211, 222–3;
~ in ill-health, 296, 300, 303, 305; ~ in death, 312, 315–16, 319, 321,324, 326,
329–31, 341, 345–7, 349, 354
death: divination of (gshin-rtsis), 12, 17, 19–20, 32–34 (plates), 39–40 (plates), 55,
117, 262, 280, 289, 306–57, 360, 381, 399; divination of ~ based on living
relatives (gson-gyis rtsis), 308–10; divination of based on the dead (gshin-gyis
rtsis), 310-56; ~ due to demonic influences ('dre-gdon sus khyer-ba), 311,
321–4; ~ due to faults and retributions (snyad-dang le-lan), 311, 316–21,
356–7; timely and untimely ~ ('chi-dus), 311-16,356–7; impact of eight great
irritations on bereaved relatives ('grams-chen brgyad), 312, 345–49, 354,
356–7, 380–81; eye of ~ (shi-mig), 312, 349–51,380–81; recurrence of ~
(ro-zlos-pa), 312, 345–49, 356–7. See also corpses, divinatory pebbles, funeral,
rebirth



429
Subject index
emptiness (stong-pa-nyid), 21, 399
even and odd numbers (rva-bse): even ‘goat-horns' (rva-ru), 88, 104, 345; irregular
numbers ('chol-bu), 88, 173; odd rhino horns' (bse-ru), 88, 104, 345; even, odd
and irregularly numbered year-signs and trigrams, 172–4
12, 19, 30–31, 41-43, 117, 141, 156, 226, 248, 260–93; ~ in ill-health, 296,
300, 305; ~ in death, 312, 315–6, 319, 321, 324, 329–33, 341, 345–7, 349, 354
human-world (mi'i 'jig-rten-gyi khams), 326, 329–31, 333, 356, 381
death-wish (ro-'dod), 242–4, 280, 282–3, 305, 314, 356; greater or lesser ~ (ro-'dod
che-chung), 231; greater and lesser outer ~ (phyi-yi ro-'dod che-chung), 87; inner
~ (nang-gi ro-'dod), 107–8; intermediate ~ (bar-gyi ro-'dod), 96, 104
dependent origination (rten-'brel), 147; twelve links of ~ (rten-'brel bcu-gnyis), 21,
112
destiny element (dbang-thang), 62, 64–5, 68, 86, 115, 117; thirty consecutive ~
(bu-'ded sum-cu), 69; origin of_,53; ~ of the years, 69; ~ of the months, days
and hours, 90–91;~ of the sexagenary year cycle, 70–85; ~ in relation to the
vitality element, 70–85, 155;~ in natal horoscope, 137–8, 140–46, 155–7,
159–60, 164–5, 168–9, 172–3, 176–87, 190–91;~ in marriage, 194–9, 208–9,
214, 216–17, 223,~ in obstacle years, 226, 228–31, 241–2, 244, 248–50, 255,
257–9;~ in the hour of divination, 262–9, 282–3, 284–7, 289–91;~ in ill-
health, 296–300, 302, 305;~ in death, 308, 310, 312, 314—7,326, 330–31, 341,
346–7, 349, 351, 356–7;~ in computational charts, 360–63, 373–4, 385–6,
390–97
dge-bsnyen spirits, 285–6
discriminative awareness (shes-rab), 46, 49
dissonant mental state (nyon-mongs), 21, 46
divination, see elemental divination
divinatory barley (mo-nas), 291
divinatory mat (gdan), 20, 140, 308, 311, 312
divinatory pebbles (rde'u), 12, 19–20, 178; residual ~ (rdel-ro/rde'u ro), 257–8, 351;
one hundred and thirty-six ~ in the fixed system of natal horoscope (nam-
zhag gtan-rtsis), 140–43; alternative methods of deploying~in natal
horoscope, 143–4; thirteen ~ in divinations concerning marriage, 196–7;
forty-seven ~ in divinations concerning obstacle years, 226–8, 229–31,
246–55; alternative methods of deploying ~ in divinations of obstacle years,
255–9; ~ in divinatons concerning the hour of divination, 262; nineteen – in
divinations of ill-health, 296, 305; twenty fixed – based on living relatives
(gson-rdel nyi-shu), 308; twelve ~ of the life-spirit (bla-rdel bcu-gnyis), 310–11;
one hundred and ninety-nine~ representing aspects of death (gshin-
rde'u/ rdel brgya-dang dgu-chu go-dgu), 310, 312, 316–17,321,326, 335–6, 341,
345, 351, 356–7; ~ in computational charts, 361-3, 387, 390
divinatory prognosis/reading (kha-dmar), 20–21, and passim
diviner (rtsis-pa), 11, 20, 140
dmu (dropsy-causing spirits), 271–2, 285–6
'do-chen (thoroughbred steed), 371
'dre/ gdon (evil spirit/demon), 21, 92, 104; ~in natal horoscope, 140, 142–3, 149,
153–4, 167, 174, 187–8; ~ in marriage, 206–7, 216; ~ in obstacle years, 232,
234, 241, 250, 254–5; ~ in the hour of divination, 262, 264, 271–2, 274, 277,
282, 284–86; ~ in ill-health, 296–7, 299–301, 303–5; in death, 312, 316, 319,
321–2, 329–30; ~ in computational charts, 360, 364–6, 368–9, 372–3, 378–80,
382, 384–7, 390, 392, 394–6; chu-'dre, 376–7; 'dre-gdon, 321–4; pho-'dre, 152;
rbad-'dre, 157, 320; ma-'dre, 369; me-'dre, 376–7; shi-'dre, 384; za-'dre, 21, 152,
213, 216, 262, 264, 267, 269, 310, 321–3; zhang-phyogs yul-'dre, 376; zhang-
'dre, 376–7; yul-'dre, 62; lan-chags 'dre, 304; gson-'dre, 288; rter-btsog 'dre, 304;
steng-gdon, 297; Iceb-'dre, 149, 154, 262, 264
drug-'gras/'bras (sixth-removed aspect), 87, 299; following sixth-removed aspect
(mar-gyi drug-'bras), 258–9
'dun-khur, 68, 70–85, 141-4, 155, 194
Dung-lo-can, 258–9
dur-bon priest, 320–21, 347
dur-byur (spirits of tomb misfortune), 382
fire element (me'i khams), 11-12, 63, 68–9, 86, 104, 109; characteristics of ~,62;
origin of~, 40; symbolic representation of ~, 19; anthropomorphic depiction
of-, 111; subjects of~, 229;~ in natal horoscope, 172, 174, 176–7, 189–91;
in marriage, 198–9, 211, 222; ~ in obstacle years, 241–2, 249, 251–2; ~ in the
hour of divination, 263, 266–9, 282–91; ~ in ill-health, 305; ~ in death,
317–19, 336; ~ in computational charts, 362–87, 390; ~ model, 141-4, 238–9
feast offering (tshogs), 324–5, 334, 364, 391
five elements ('byung-ba lnga), 20, 49, 53, 174–5, 189, 199, 262, 363; definition of ~,
63; discrete ~,63; outer, inner and secret aspects of_, 49, 63–4, ~ at
conception, 189–90; dissolution of ~ at death, 353. See also earth, fire, iron,
water, wood
five paths (lam lnga), 49
four continents (gling bzhi), 40
four truths (bden-pa bzhi), 49
fundamental ignorance (ma-rig-pa), 64
funeral ('dur-shid), 308–10, 312, 380–82; public ~ (shid-kyi ston-mo khrom-rtsis),
312, 356; concluding rites of ~, 356–7; thirteen modes of ~ ('dur-lugs bcu-
gsum), 326; twelve special modes of ~ (dur-lugs bcu-gnyis), 334-5; ~ status
('dur-thang), 311, 324–6, 356–7; elemental ~ of cremation, entombment,
interment, sky-burial and water burial ('byung-dur sil-bu), 312, 325, 334,
336-41, 356–7,360, 380–81; ~ procession, site and recitations (dur-rdzongs-
dang sa-'tshol dur-lnga'i smrang-sgo), 312, 356; twelve types of — pyre (spur-
rigs bcu-gnyis), 342–4
ill-health: divination of (nad-rtsis), 12, 19–20, 31, 117, 262, 280, 285–6, 289–90,
294–305, 345–7, 360, 379–80, 399; pine-tree divination of~, 190, 297–300,
302–3; divination of fortunate and unfortunate households (dpal-byur-khyim),
301-3; divination of the branches of turquoise-coloured juniper (gYu-shug
'dab-rgyas), 301-3; divination of the degree to which the divination grid is
overstepped (ling-tshe brgal-lam ma-brgal), 301-3; divination of the fifteen
golden bridges (gser-zam bco-lnga), 301–8; divination of the fruit of the wish-
granting tree (dpag-bsam 'bras-bu), 301-3; divination tally of the dying and
living eyes (shi-mig gson-mig grangs), 301-3; four hundred and four diseases,
296; recognition of diseases and demonic influences (nad-dang gdon ngos-
bzung), 303–5. See also divinatory pebbles
inauspicious years (lo ngan), 67–68, 145, 172, 174–6, 196; earthly sentinel (sa'i bya-
ra), 87, 174–5, 196; eight inauspicious fire years (lo-ngan me-brgyad), 196, 214;
eight orphan years (dva-phrug lo brgyad), 87, 174, 176, 196; eight years
endowed with the five elements (byung-ba lnga-ldan lo brgyad), 87, 174–5, 196;
eight years of widowhood (yugs-sa lo brgyad), 87, 174, 176, 196; eleven years
susceptible to ogres (srin-khyer lo bcu-gcig), 87, 174–5, 196; four black fanged
years (lo-nag mche-ba-can bzhi), 87, 174–5, 196; four black undertakers (dur-
mi nag-po bzhi), 87, 174–5, 196; four naked demons (ther-'dre mi bzhi), 67–8,
87, 174–5, 196; heavenly sentinel (gnam-gyi bya-ra), 87,174-5, 196; seven
malign years (gdug-ba-can-gyi lo bdun), 87, 174, 196; seven years of bad omen
(ltas-ngan lo bdun), 87, 174–5; seven years of drought (than-pa lo [bdun]), 87,
174-5, 196; six lesser stars (skar-chung drug), 87, 174, 176, 196; three soaring
black sons (lding-nag bu gsum), 87, 174–5, 196; ten years endowed with two
elements (byung-ba gnyis-ldan lo bcu), 87, 174, 176, 196; twelve accursed iron
and fire years (nag-'thus lcags-me lo bcu-gnyis), 87, 116, 196, 218, 345, 348;
twelve inauspicious years (lo-gnan bcu-gnyis), 87; twelve iron years promoting
drought (than-skyes lo bcu-gnyis), 87, 174–5, 196
Indian astrology (skar-rtsis), see astrology
inferior existence(s) (ngan-song), 242, 329,356; three ~ (ngan-song gsum), 326, 329,
381. See also hells, tormented spirits, animals
intermediate state (bar-do), 326, 329, 353
iron element (lcags-kyi khams), 11-12, 63, 68–9, 86, 104, 109; characteristics of ~,
62, origin of ~,40; symbolic representation of ~, 19; anthropomorphic
depiction of~, 111 (plate); subjects of ~, 229;~ in natal horoscope, 172, 174,
176–7, 189–91; ~in marriage, 198–9, 211, 222; ~ in obstacle years, 249, 252;
~ in the hour of divination, 265–70, 282–91;~ in ill-health, 305; ~ in death,
317–19, 336,~ in computational charts, 362–87, 390; model ~, 141-4, 238–9
gab-tshe charts, see hidden points
garuda (khyung), 363–4, 374, 390
gdon, see 'drel gdon
geomancy (sa-dpyad), 12, 19–20, 55, 120, 223, 287–8, 360, 375, 399; geomantic
aspects of the years, months, days and hours, 24–29 (plates), 118–137, 140
gi-gong, 205–7
gnod-sbyin (mountain or sylvan spirits, Skt. yakşa), 158, 188–9,397
gnyan (plague-causing spirits), 21, 62; ~in natal horoscope, 149, 153, 157, 167;
~ in marriage, 217–18, 222; ~ in obstacle years, 242–4, 246; ~ in the hour of
divination, 265, 267, 269, 280, 282–3, 285–6; ~ in ill-health, 309;~ in
computational charts, 366, 393, 396
god realms (lha-yul), 326, 329–31, 333, 356, 381
'gong-po (bewitchers), 21; ~in natal horoscope, 48, 157, 158; ~in marriage, 219,
220; ~ in obstacle years, 242–4, 246;~ in the hour of divination, 262, 264–6,
268, 270–71, 279–80, 285–6; ~ in ill-health, 299; in computational charts,
378, 396
gre-bo (ghosts of male murder victims), 21, 62; ~ in natal horoscope, 150, 153, 157;
~ in obstacle years, 241, 250; ~ in the hour of divination, 262, 264–6, 268,
282, 284; ~ in ill-health, 303; in computational charts, 378
gre-mo (ghosts of female murder victims), 149, 152, 324–5, 379–80
gshed-ma (avenging spirits/avengers), 321–3
gshen of prediction (phyva-gshen-gyi theg-pa), 17
gSer-lo-can, 258–9
gShin-chu rab-bsrung star, 156
gter-ma/gter-chos (treasure/treasure-doctrine), 16, 55–7,334-5
gter-ston (treasure-finder), 57
gtor-ma offering (Skt. balı), 20–21, 162, 241–2, 262, 264–5, 282–3, 324-5, 343–4,
365, 391, 393, 396; ~ symbolic of human flesh (dmar-chen), 342–4
gtsug-lag, 17, 202
gyi-ling (thoroughbred steed), 393, 397
gYu-lo-can, 258–9
'ju-thig cord, 11, 17
Jyesthā (snron; Antares), 88. See also constellations
kha-ral, 68, 70–85, 141-4, 155, 194
kha-yan, 68, 70–85, 141-4, 155, 194
kham-yu divination of the wedding day, 212–13
khong-nong, 68, 70-85, 141-4, 155, 194
'Khor-lo rab-stongs star, 156
kīla, see dagger
klu (serpentine water spirits, Skt. nāga), 19–21, 46, 48–51, 54, 62, 92–4, 104; ~ in
natal horoscope, 147–8, 154, 157–8, 167, 174, 188–9; ~ in obstacle years, 229,
241–2, 244, 246, 257;~ in the hour of divination, 262–72, 274, 276, 278–80,
282–3, 285–6; ~ in ill-health, 297, 299; ~ in death, 310, 323;~ in
computational charts, 380, 394, 396; hybrid klu-bdud, 219; hybrid klu-bsen,
257, 320; hybrid klu-btsan, 148, 262, 264–5, 274, 277, 322, hybrid klu-gnyan,
263, 266, 268, 274, 276; klu-mo, 157; hybrid klu-sman, 148, 282–3; hybrid klu-
srin, 282–3, 322
Kșttikā (smin-drug, Pleiades), 212. See also constellations
earth element(sa'i khams), 11-12, 63, 68–9, 86, 104, 109; characteristics of ~,62;
origin of ~, 40; symbolic representation of~, 19, anthropomorphic depiction
of~, 111 (plate); subjects of~, 229; ~ in natal horoscope, 172, 174, 176–7,
189–91;~ in marriage, 198–9, 211, 222, ~ in obstacle years, 241, 249, 252,
~ in the hour of divination, 263–4, 266–9, 282–91, ~ in ill-health, 305, ~ in
death, 317–19, 336; ~ in computational charts, 362–87, 390; ~ model, 141-4,
165, 169, 238–9
elective divination, 280–93
elements, see five elements
elemental divination ('byung-rtsis), 11, 15, 20, 145, 399; summary of ~, 16–17;
origin and transmission of~, 12, 19, 44—59; lineage-holders of ~ 23–34
(plates), 53–9, 140; methodology of~, 20; preliminaries of ~, 19, 60–117.
See also computational charts, death, ill-health, marriage, natal horoscope,
obstacle years
elemental relationships, of identity, mother, son, enemy and friend (rang ma-bu
dgra-'grogs), 20, 68–9,90–91, 109; explanation of, 63; intellect which analyses
~63; mind which apprehends positive and negative consequences of -,63;
~in natal horoscope, 141-4, 160, 165, 168–9,178,180–81, 184–7, 190–91;
~ in marriage, 198–9, 205, 208–9, 216, 223; ~ in obstacle years, 226, 228–31,
234–5, 237, 239–40, 242, 244, 248–9;~ in the hour of divination, 273, 278,
284–5, 287–90; ~ in ill-health, 296-300, 303–5; ~ in death, 314-15, 317–19,
321, 347, 349, 351, 353–4, 356–7;~ in computational charts, 360–62, 390–97
empowerment (dbang-bskur), 390, 393; long-life ~ (tshe-dbang), 228–9, 393-5
heart-orb (dpal-be'ul śrīvatsa), 205–7
hells (dmyal-ba), 46, 241, 326, 329–31, 333
hidden points of divination (gab-tshe), 11, 23 (plates), 49, 53, 55,60–117, 343–4;
four primary ~ (gab-rtse bzhi), 63-4
higher existences/realms of rebirth (mtho-ris), 334. See also god realms, antigods
human-world
Hīnayāna Buddhism (theg-dman), 353
homa burnt offerings (sbyin-sreg), 204, 318–20, 376
hour(s), twelve (dus-tshod bcu-gnyis), 19,64, 89–90; destiny elements of ~,90–91;
~ calculated according to sectors of growth and decline, 90; ~ calculated in
trigrams, 83; ~ in geomancy, 135–7; natal ~ (skyes-pa'i dus-tshod), 62, 140–41,
200;~ in natal horoscope, 165;~ in marriage, 222; ~ of divination (dus-rtsis),
IDum-po-pa tradition (IDum-po-pa'i lugs), 298
lha (gods, Skt. deva), 16, 46, 48, 92, 104; ~ in natal horoscope , 154, 157–8, 188–9;
~in marriage, 219–20; ~ in obstacle years, 241-4; ~ in the hour of divination,
263, 267, 269, 271–2, 278–80; ~ in death, 310, 323, 336;~ in computational
charts, 364–6, 369, 379–80, 385, 387, 392–3; lha-'dre, 186, 392; lha-'dre sde-
brgyad, 48, 391; hybrid lha-btsan, 320; srog-gi lha , 377–8; mo-lha, 21; rtse-lha,
377–8, 396; mdze-lha, 321; zhang-lha, 187, 377–8; yul-lha, 21, 92, 94, 104,
206–7, 241, 262, 264–5, 267, 269, 321, 335–6, 364, 377–8, 396; nang-lha,
377–8, nor-lha, 219–20, 262, 264, 396; pho-lha, 21, 186, 229, 231, 366, 377–8,



430
The White Beryl
factors in ~, 229–31; three cycles of sPang-rgyan lo-ma, 258–9; Chinese
method of pebble distribution (rgya-nag rdel-skor), 257–8; ~ based on numeric
squares, 241–5; ~ based on multiples of nine, 249–55; ~ based on sectors of
growth and decline, 248–9; ~ based on the trigrams, 236–41; twenty-eight
general obstacles associated with numeric squares, 241-45; twenty-seven
general obstacles associated with trigrams, 232–41; four minor obstacles,
246–8, 316. See also divinatory pebbles
offerings of purificatory smoke (bsangs), 20–21, 380
ill-health, 296, 300, 305; ~ in death, 312, 315–16, 319, 324, 326, 330, 341,
345–7, 349, 351, 354; (four) first seasonal ~ (ra-ba bzhi), 88, 117, 120, 128,
156, 168–9, 218, 308, 346; (four) last seasonal ~ (tha-chung lo bzhi), 88, 117,
120, 128, 156, 168–9, 218, 308, 341,346; (four) mid-seasonal ~ ('bring-ngo
bzhi), 88, 117, 120, 128, 156, 168–9, 218, 308, 346
Mrgaśiras (mgo; Orion lambda), 88. See also constellations
mtshun (ancestor spirits), 21, 282–3, 335–6, 365
multiple(s) of nine (dgu-mig), 112, 115–16; male and female computational
sequences of ~ (pho-dang mo'i bskor), 249–50; ~ based on combined signs
(sbrags-ma), 115–16, 252–3; ~ based on trigrams (spar-kha'i dgu-mig), 253;
~ based on a solitary sign, 115, 249–52; ~ combined with tomb-signs ('dom-
gnad), 249, 251; childbirth coinciding with ~ (skyes-mtshang gnad-kyi mig),
249, 251; crucial ~,94; most dangerous ~ (mtshang-chen dgu-mig), 249, 251;
~ based on rnga-zor calculations (rnga-zor dgu-mig), 252–3; ~ based on
constitutional types (rus-khams dgu-mig), 254–5; ~ based on numeric squares
(sme-ba'i dgu-mig), 253–4; ~ based on eight elements (khams-brgyad mig), 249,
251–2; ~ in marriage, 213, 217–18; ~ in obstacle years, 226, 249–55, 258; ~ in
death, 308, 315–16, 345–6; ~ in computational charts, 384
393, 396; phrag-lha, 377–8; ma-lha, 187; dgra-lha, 21, 149, 228, 231, 250,
265–6, 268, 274–5, 277, 364, 377–8, 392–3, 396; hybrid dgra-sri, 298; 'go-lha,
21, 49, 157, 228, 285, 296, 304, 314, 360, 369; lha-bsrungs, 262–70
liberation (thar-pa/ grol-ba), 48, 399; eight aspects of ~ (rnam-thar brgyad), 49
lifespan (tshe), 158–60, 222, 242, 259, 297–300, 305, 312, 316, 364, 369–71, 378,
384, 391–2, 394-5; rituals that attract ~ (tshe-gugs), 377
life-spirit (bla), 60, 296–7, 301, 330, 346–7,368–9, 378, 382, 384, 392–5
life-supporting talisman (bla-gnas), 394
Inga-khram, 300
Inga-mthun (fifth-removed harmonious aspect), 87; following fifth-removed aspect
(mar-gyi lnga), 349–50
log-men, 86–7, 142–3, 177, 208, 214, 216, 218, 226, 228–9, 258–9, 303, 312, 315–16,
329, 345, 348, 354, 361–2
log-men aspects: adversarial gate (gshed-sgo), 107–8; cutting influence of demons
(bdud-chad), 86, 213, 216, 229, 297, 315–16, 320; earthly extension aspect (sa-
brgyangs), 86, 228–9; earthly gate (sa-sgo), 86, 92, 107–8, 218, 228, 229, 235,
236, 247–8, 299; earthly peg aspect (sa-yi rten-phur), 86, 228–9, 298–300; five
acquisitions ('byor-pa lnga), 86, 228–9; five calamities (phung-gyod lnga), 86,
228–9; five lineage interruptions (rus-chod lnga), 86, 228–9; five separations
(bye-bral lnga), 86, 228–9; four adversaries/adversarial year signs (gshed-
bzhi), 63, 115, 188, 231, 236, 348, 353, 381–2; four separations (bye-bral bzhi),
87; heavenly extension aspect (gnam-brgyangs), 86, 228–9; heavenly gate
(gnam-sgo), 86, 92, 107–8, 120, 218, 222, 228–9, 235–6, 239, 247–8, 265, 267,
269, 302; heavenly lifeline aspect (yas/ gnam-gyi 'ju-thag), 86, 228–9, 297–300,
302; vitality of the heavenly lifeline, 228; roaming of the life-spirit (bla-
'khyams), 86, 229, 235, 315–16; suspended lifeline (dpyang-thag), 297–300;
three compatible year-signs, 122–3, 155, 205, 229–31, 315–16, 351
longevity (tshe-ring) 300, 369, 390; ~ rite (tshe-chog), 201, 235, 248, 297, 310, 364,
366, 392; ~ attainment (tshe-sgrub), 365, 372; vase of ~ (tshe-bum), 364, 372–3;
water of life (tshe-chu), 372–3
lower/evil destiny, see inferior existence
luck element (klung-rta), 68, 86; ~ of the years, 69; ~ of the months, days and hours,
90–91; origin of -,53; ~ of the sexagenary year cycle, 70–85; ~ of the trigrams,
150; ~ of the numeric squares, 75, 79, 150; most excellent~(rab-klungs),
330–31; ~in natal horoscope, 140–45, 155–7, 159–60, 168, 178–87;~ in
marriage, 196–9, 208–9, 214, 216, 223; ~ in obstacle years, 226, 228, 248–9,
255, 257–9;~ in the hour of divination, 265, 267, 269, 282–4, 284, 286, 290; ~ in
ill-health, 296–300, 302, 305; ~ in death, 308, 310, 312, 314-17,330–31, 341,
346–7,349, 351, 356–7; ~in computational charts, 360–3,384,386–7,390–7
parinirvāṇa (yongs-su myang-'das), 46
past actions (las/ karma), 46, 48, 69, 140, 145, 160–63, 169, 186–7, 194–5,314, 364
Phe'u sha-ral star, 156
Phug-pa school (phug-lugs), 15, 17–18, 88, 128, 172; accurate system of calendrical
astrology (rnam-par dag-pa'i rtsis), 15; accurate lineage/tradition of ~ (rnam-
dag lugs), 58–9
phra-men-ma, 397
physical posture, divinations concerning ('dug-stang), 292–3
pious attendant (nyan-thos), 342–4
planets, eight(gza'brgyad), 15, 19–20,45,54, 64, 108–9; origins of ~53;
anthropomorphic depictions of ~, 111; Jupiter (gza'phur-bu, Thursday), 53,62,
65,70,85, 108–9,210–11, 336–7, 339, 348–9; Mars (gza'mig-dmar, Tuesday),
65, 70–85, 108–9, 210–11,336–7,341, 348–9; Mercury (gza'lhag-pa,
Wednesday), 49,62,65, 108–9, 210–11, 223,336–8,348–9; Moon (gza'zla-ba,
Monday), 49, 62, 70–85,89, 108–9,336–8,348–9; Rahu (khyab-'jug), 108–9,
222, 223; Saturn (gza'spen-pa, Saturday), 53,62,65, 70–85, 108–9, 210–11,
336–7,341, 348–9; Sun (gza'nyi-ma, Sunday), 49, 62, 108–9,336–7,341, 348–9;
Venus (gza'pa-sangs, Friday), 53,62,65, 108–9, 336–7,348–9; calculation of
calendar days in ~, 109; ~ of destiny (dbang-gza), 64–5; ~in natal horoscope,
145, 164–7,186; in marriage, 210, 212, 222; ~ in ill-health, 296; ~ in death, 308,
312,321,324, 326,329, 341, 345, 348–9,353–4; ~in computational charts, 381
planetary aspects, 109; planetary luck aspects of the months (zla-klung-gi gza),
70–85; birth under an extraneous ~ (gza'gzhan skyes), 166–7; impact of the
mother's luck ~ on childbirth, 138; inner ~, 109, 165; intermediate ~ 109,
165, 166–7; outer ~, 109, 165, 213, 216, 229–31
planetary conjunctions: triple ~ (gza' sum-'dom), 164–5, 188; lesser ~ (gza' chung-
ba), 164; major ~ (gza' che-ba), 164; triple Jupiter ~, 164–5, 196; triple Mars ~,
164–5, 196; triple Mercury ~, 164-5, 196; triple planetary alliance (gza'-spun
gsum), 166–7; triple Saturn -, 164–5, 186
prayer flag (rlung-rta), 21, 386–7
Pūrvabhadrapada (khrums-stod; Pegasi alpha), 17, 222. See also constellations
M
ma-mo (imprecatory female spirits, Skt. mātarah), 21, 62,92–4, 104; ~in natal
horoscope, 157; ~ in obstacle years, 241–2, 244; ~ in the hour of divination,
271–2; in ill-health, 303; in computational charts, 365, 369, 380
Madhyamaka (dbu-ma), 18
Mahāyāna Buddhism (theg-chen), 353
mandala (dkyil-'khor), 49, 128, 391
mandala-offering (mchod-pa'i mandal), 342–4, 364, 390–91
mantra (sngags), 18, 365; Hundred-syllable Mantra (yig-brgya), 329–30; mantra
robes (sngags-gos), 342–4; retentive mantra (gzungs), 21, 219, 220, 371–2, 390,
394-5; secret mantras (gsang-sngags), 342–4; wrathful mantra (drag-sngags),
390–91; Six-syllable Mantra (yi-ge drug-pa), 329
mantrin (sngags-pa), 263, 330–31, 334, 342–4, 346, 360, 365, 391, 394
marital compatibility (gi-gong khug-pa): nine permutated calculations of – (khug-
pa/gi-gong khug-pa dgu), 194, 205–7; further permutated calculation of ~
(gsang-ba yang-khug), 194, 208
marriage, divination of (bag-rtsis/gnyen-rtsis), 12, 17, 19–20, 27–30 (plates), 37
(plates), 55, 87, 117, 140, 192—223, 262, 280, 360, 373, 399; calculation of
seniority (ni-sha), 194, 208; collective tally of the elements (spun-grangs), 194,
196, 199, 205; hidden points of heaven, earth, and their offspring, 194, 212,
223; individual elemental aspects and outcomes based on the destiny element
(rkyang-pa dbang-thang sgos-kyi 'bras), 194, 196, 198; rejecting a partner who
has had unlawful sex (byi-spangs), 194; selecting a partner of compatible year-
sign (lo-gros sdeb-tshul), 194-5; inauspicious and favourable years signs for ,
196–7; ~ and the natal month, 200, – and the natal trigram, 200–203,
opportune planets and constellations for ~ (khri-sgo gza'-skar), 194, 212–13;
marital compatibility based on constitutional types, 194, 204-5; spouse or
partner with inauspicious year-sign and trigrams, 158; twelve indispensable
divinations for ~ (khri-sgo bcu-gnyis), 210–11. See also divinatory pebbles,
marital compatibility, nuptials
martial conquest (gYul-rgyal), 11, 15–17. See also Svarodaya
meditation (sgom), 334
meditational deity (yi-dam), 53, 365, 391
month(s), twelve (zla-ba bcu-gnyis), 19,88; naming of ~ after constellations, 110;
destiny elements of -,90–91; ~ calculated according to sectors of growth and
decline, 90; intercalary ~ (zla-bshol), 88; mid-period of the ~ (zla-sgang), 88,
186; ~ in geomancy, 127–32; natal – (skyes-zla), 140-41, 186, 194, 196–7, 200,
205, 208–9, 210–11; ~in marriage, 220–21; ~in obstacle years, 258–9; ~in
nāga (serpentine water spirits), see klu
Narapa tradition (na-ra-p-a'i lugs), 298
natal horoscope (tshe-rabs las-rtsis), 12, 17, 19–20, 24–27 (plates), 36 (plate), 54, 87,
138–91, 262, 280, 360, 399; secretly pointed-out instructions (sbas-pa mdzub-
tshugs), 156; sectors of growth and decline in ~, 144, 178–86; number of
children based on coincidence of the parents' destiny elements, 176–7;
children of superior, average and inferior types, 186–8; nativity luck, 168–9,
189–90, 253. See also childbirth and divinatory pebbles
natal horoscope, diverse predictions (tshe-rabs las-rtsis-kyi kha-dmar sna-tshogs): ~ of
backward luck (klung-rta'i rgyab), 183; ~ of backward void luck (rgyab-stongs),
143–4; ~ of divine glory, lifespan and demon prognosis (lha-dpal tshe-bdud),
145, 158–60; ~ of established forward luck (klung-rta mdun-tshugs), 143–4,
183; ~ concerning inauspicious luck aspects of the years (lo-yi klungs ngan),
170–71, ~ concerning five coincidences of son or daughter ending the family
line, 177; ~ concerning five coincidences of inauspicious luck, 178;
~ concerning the flourishing of the enemy aspect of the luck element (klung-rta
dgra-dar), 183; ~ of forward luck (klung-rta mdun), 183; ~ concerning greater,
middling and lesser degrees of ill-omen (ltas-ngan che='bring-chung gsum), 172;
~ of nine inauspicious omens (ngan-pa dgu 'dzom), 133, 188; ~ concerning
prosperity and misfortune (dpal-byur gnyis), 145, 160; void luck (klung stongs-
pa), 183; ~ based on the destiny elements of four generations, 190–91, ~
concerning natal years, months, days and hours, 145–56; ~ concerning even,
odd and irregularly numbered year-signs and trigrams, 172–4; ~ concerning
the weight of past actions (rgya-ma), 145, 160–63; ~ concerning auspicious
and inauspicious coincidences of the natal trigram, 169
nirvāņa (myang-'das), 49
numeric square(s), nine (sme-ba dgu), 12, 16, 19–20, 64, 92-104, 115–16, 305,
origins of ~, 53; attributes of ~,92, 271–2; destiny ~ (dbang-gi sme-ba), 70–85,
96,97–101 (plates), 102, 104, 205–7; body/natal ~ (lus-kyi sme-ba/ skyes-sme),
70–85, 96, 97–101 (plates), 102, 104, 116, 157–8, 174, 178, 186, 204, 205–8,
214, 217, 241, 246–7, 253–4, 304, 308, 310; vitality ~ (srog-gi sme-ba), 69,
70–85, 96, 97–101 (plates), 102, 104, 205–7; luck ~ (klung-gi sme-ba), 96, 104,
194, 205–7; calculating ~ of vitality, destiny, body and luck, 96; three rows of
~(sme-phreng gsum), 36–43 (plates), 96-101, 104, 174; current – (babs-sme),
102–4, 142–3, 241, 247–9, 257–9, 308, 321; calculating days and hours in “,
103; ~in natal horoscope, 143; ~ in marriage, 194, 205–8, 211-14; in obstacle
years, 226, 229–31, 241-5, 253–5, 314, 316; ~ in the hour of divination, 77,
273–4, 278–9;~ in ill-health, 303–4, ~ in death, 312, 314, 316-17, 321, 323,
326, 329,341, 345, 349, 353, 354, 356; in computational charts, 390–97
nuptials, divination of (bag-ma'i lam-rtsis), 194, 360, 373; ~ determined through the
divination chart named hidden point of earth, 194, 212; direction of the ~
chart (phyogs), 212, 222; ~ constellation (skar-ma'i lam-rtsis), 212, 222; ~ day
(tshe-nyi'i lam-rtsis), 212, 222; ~ hour (dus-tshod-kyi lam-rtsis), 212, 222; ~
numeric square (sme-ba'i lam-rtsis), 212, 216–18; ~ planet/weekday (gza'i
lam-rtsis), 212, 222; ~ seat (bzhag-sa), 212, 223; ~ spirit lord of the soil (sa-
bdag lam-rtsis), 212, 222; ~ transport (sna-len), 212, 223; ~ trigram (spar-kha'i
lam-rtsis), 212, 216; ~ year (lo'i lam-rtsis), 212, 218–20; month for giving away
a bride (zla-ba'i rdzong-lugs), 212, 220–21; five essential persons (dgos-pa'i mi
rigs lnga), 212, 223; special calculation of the celestial dog spirit (gnam-khyi'i
sgos-rtsis), 212, 222–3; ten factors governing the time for giving away a bride
(brdzang-lugs bcu), 222; twenty unfortunate nuptial ties (byur-thag nyi-shu),
213–17; potential flaws of brides of particular ages (bag-ma'i lo-skyon),
219–20. See also marital compatibility, marriage
reality (chos-nyid): abiding nature of ~ (gnas-lugs), 59; expanse of actual ~ (chos-
dbyings), 46, 391. See also emptiness
rebirth [process] (srid-pa), 46, 140, 233, 311, 326–34, 356, 399; six realms of
existence/rebirth, 46, 48, 326, 334
respiration, 353
rGya-yi lo-dkar ha-sha, 196-7
rgyal-po (king spirits), 21, 62, 92, 104; ~in natal horoscope, 148–50, 152, 154,
157–8, 167; ~ in marriage, 216–20; ~ in obstacle years, 241–4, 246, 250;
~ in the hour of divination, 262–9, 271–2, 274–5, 278–80, 285–6; ~ in death,
319–20, 322; ~ in computational charts, 371, 376–8, 383; rgyal-po pho-'dre,
322; rgyal-rigs, 117
rite(s) (cho-ga): ~ of aversion (zlog-chog), 229, 242, 285, 308, 310, 365, 369–70, 374,
390,392, 394; ritual aversion of the Mataraḥ (ma-mo'i bzlog-mangs), 284;
~ of exorcism, 310, 353, 356, 368, 374, 377, 392, 395; ~ of reparition and
confession (bskang-bshags), 242, 364, 369, 391–2; seven grain ~ ('bru-bdun cho-
ga), 216; ritual ransom (from death), 301, 364, 377, 392. See also funeral
ritual dagger, see dagger
ritual service and means for attainment (bsnyen-sgrub), 370, 376, 390–91
rnga-zor, 199; ~ calculation corresponding to nativity luck (btsas-klungs mig), 199
rudra, 383
sa-bdag (geomantic spirit lords of the soil, Skt. bhūmipati), 19, 21, 46, 48, 62, 92,
104; ~ in geomancy, 120–37; ~in natal horoscope, 147–54, 157, 166–7, 169,
186, 188–9; ~in marriage, 212, 216, 222; ~ in obstacle years, 241-4, 246,
250–51; ~in the hour of divination, 262, 264–72, 274, 276–9, 282–3, 285–6;
~ in ill-health, 299, 303; ~ in death, 310, 322—3; ~in computational charts,
375, 380–83, 396; dus-tshod-kyi sa-bdag, 120, 135–7, 296, 353; spar-kha sme-ba
gza'-skar-gyi sa-bdag, 296; zhag-gi sa-bdag, 120, 133–4, 296, 353; sa-bdag sgo-
gsum, 383; zla-ba'i sa-bdag, 120, 127–32, 296, 353; gza'skar sa-bdag, 133; sil-
ma'i sa-bdag, 120, 128, 137; lo'i sa-bdag, 120, 122–6, 296, 353
scapegoat effigy (glud), 241
se-zhig, 68, 70–85, 141-4, 155, 194
obstacle years, divination of (lo-gcig keg-rtsis), 12, 17, 19, 20, 30 (plates), 37–39
(plates), 55, 87, 115, 117, 213, 224–59, 262, 280, 308, 360, 399; seven harsh



431
Subject index
zodiac (go-la), 11, 17; twelve signs of ~, 129–32, 137
zor, 229, 241–2, 320–21
Zoroastrianism, 17
triple planetary conjunction (gza'sum-'dom). See planetary conjunction
tsam-pa, 271–2, 320
turtle shell divination (rus-sbal), 12, 22–23 (plates), 60–117; ~ of emanation (sprul-
pa'i rus-sbal), 48–9,59; ~ of sentient existence (srid-pa'i rus-sbal), 46, 48, 59,
62, 111; ~ of the material world (chags-pa'i rus-sbal), 40, 59; ~ of the natural
state (gnas-lugs rus-sbal), 40, 59; golden turtle of subjective consciousness
(yid-byed gser-gyi rus-sbal), 40; silver turtle of objective phenomena (chos-bya
dngul-gyi rus-sbal), 40; reliquary ~ of exegesis or incision (bshad-pa'il gshas-
pa'i ring-sel-gyi rus-sbal), 49, 59
sectors of growth and decline, twelve (dar-gud bcu-gnyis), 53, 112–15; similes
indicative of ~, 112–15, 183; sectors of decline (gud), 109–10, 145; sectors of
growth (dar-ba) 109–10, 145, 241, 274; disturbing inferior prognosis (gyod),
109; mediocre prognosis (zhud), 109; months, years, days, hours and trigrams
calculated according to ~, 112; ~in natal horoscope, 142–4, 160–3, 168–9,
178–86,~ in marriage, 194, 208–9; ~ in obstacle years, 195, 226, 248–9,~ in
the hour of divination, 287, 289–91; ~ in ill-health, 296, 303–5; ~ in death,
312, 329–30, 333–34, 345, 354; ~ in computational charts, 360
selflessness, two modes of (bdag-med rnam-gnyis), 399
sensory constituents, eighteen (khams bcu-brgyad), 53
skilful means (thabs), 46, 49,147, 187
skull-drum (dāmaru), 365, 392
sman-mo (mermaids and celestial spirits who possess young girls), 21, 167, 206–7;
hybrid sman-'go, 157; mo-sman, 335–6; mtsho-sman, 241–2, 274, 277, 282–3,
322, 324–5; gnam-gyi sman-mo, 253. See also klu.
solstice (nyi-ldog): summer ~, 88, 122–3; winter ~,88
spiritual friend (dge-bshes), 324–5, 364, 390–91
sPor-thang(scrolls), 19, 46, 53, 68
srang weight, 342
sri(treacherous spirits), 21, 241-2, 310, 367, 379, 393-4, 319, 320, 396; phung-sri,
147, 289,274,276, 389; chu-sri, 289–3; dam-sri, 289–3, 285–6, 365, 378; dam-
sri-mo, 267,969-70,274,276; dgra-sri, 883; dur-sri, 389, 190, 193; chung-sri,
368–9, 372–3, 394, 397; god-sri, 394, 397; me-sri, 282–3; rta-sri, 397
srin-[po] (ogres, Skt. rākṣasa), 46, 174, 188–9, 282, 297–300, 309, 330–31, 371–2;
srin-mo, 188–9, 368, sa-srin, 136, 320
srung-ma (protector deity), 53, 229, 296, 310, 391, 392; dam-can bka'-srung-ma
(oath-bound protectors of the Buddhist teachings), 274, 277
stūpa (mchod–rten) 48, 204, 229, 241–2, 265–6, 268,329–30, 334, 342–4, 374–5,
391, 394; ~ symbolising the Buddha's enlightenment (byang-chub mchod-rten),
49–52; reliquary ~, 324–5; votive reliquary ~,314; bkra-shis sgo-mang~,
49–51; cho-'phrul ~, 49–51; lha-babs mchod-rten ~, 49–51; myang-'das mchod-
rten, 49–51
sūtra (mdo), 15, 302
Svarodaya (dbyangs-'char), 16, 18–19, 40. See also martial conquest
svāstika (gYung-drung), 187, 205–7, 223, 301, 314-5, 343–4, 365–6, 385–6, 394-5
vajra (rdo-rje), 205–7, 342–4, 365, 368–9, 390–91
vehicles, nine (theg-dgu), 353
Vinaya ('dul-ba), 18, 342–4
Višākhā (sa-ga; Librae alpha), 212, 222. See also constellations
vital energy (rlung), 189–90; five kinds of ~ (rlung lnga), 189
vitality element (srog), 69, 86, 133; origin of ~, 53; ~ of the years, 68, ~ of the
months, days and hours, 90–91; ~ of the sexagenary year cycle, 70–85;
relationship with destiny element, 70–85; ~ in natal horoscope, 140–6,
154–7, 159–60, 165, 168–9, 178–87, 190; ~ in marriage, 196–9, 205, 208–9,
213–4, 216, 222–3; ~ in obstacle years, 226, 228–9, 241, 248–9, 254–5, 257–9;
in the hour of divination, 280, 282–4, 286, 289–91; ~ in ill-health, 296-300,
302, 305; ~ in death, 308, 310, 312, 314-17, 326, 330-31, 341, 346–7, 349,
351, 356–7; ~in computational charts, 360–63, 367, 369, 372–3,378, 384,
387, 390–97; ransom of~(srog-bslu), 214, 216, 231, 382
votive terracotta image (satstsha), 342-4
water element (chu'i khams), 11-12, 63, 68–9, 86, 104, 109; characteristics of ~,62;
origin of ~, 40; symbolic representation of ~; 19, anthropomorphic depiction
of, 111 (plate); subjects of ~, 229; ~in natal horoscope, 172, 174, 176–7,
189–91; ~ in marriage, 198–9, 211, 222;~ in obstacle years, 241–2, 249, 252;
~ in the hour of divination, 266–70, 282–91; ~ in ill-health, 305; ~ in death,
317–19, 336; ~ in computational charts, 362–87,390; model ~, 141-4, 238–9;
water libation (chu-gtor), 222, 283
weekday (gza), 305. See also planet
wind-horse of luck (klung-rta), see prayer flag
wine, divinations concerning (chang-rtsis), 285, 287
wood element (shing-gi khams), 11–12,63,68–9, 86, 104, 109; characteristics of ~,
62; origin of ~, 40; symbolic representation of ~, 19, anthropomorphic
depiction of~, 111 (plate); subjects of, 229; ~ in natal horoscope, 176–7,
189–91; ~in marriage, 198–9, 211, 222; ~ in obstacle years, 249, 251, 289;
~ in the hour of divination, 262—3, 266–9, 282–91,~ in ill-health, 305; ~ in
death, 317–19, 336;~ in computational charts, 362–87, 390; model ~,65, 112,
115, 141-4, 165, 238–9, 297–300, 363–87,397
wooden slate of death (khram-shing), 214, 254, 383
world-system(s) ('jig-rten-gyi khams), 15; three ~ of desire, form, and
formlessness (khams-gsum), 40; ~ of desire ('dod-khams), 326; ~ of form
(gzugs-khams), 326
wrathful sorcery (mngon-spyod), 391, 399
talismanic seal (phyag-rgya), 21
tantra (rgyud), 15, 54, 55; four classes of ~ (rgyud-sde bzhi), 353
ten levels (sa bcu), 49
the'u-brang (malign goblins) 20–21, 62; ~ in natal horoscope, 153–4, 158; ~ in
marriage, 217–18; ~ in obstacle years, 241; ~ in the hour of divination, 262,
264, 270–2, 279–80, 285–6; ~ in death, 319; ~ in computational charts, 368,
376–7, 379–80
thread-cross (mdos), 21; ~ in marriage, 194, 201, 204, 222–3; ~ in obstacle years,
229, 231, 241–2, 244, 257; in the hour of divination, 274–7, 282–3, 285;~ in
computational charts, 365, 367–8, 371, 374, 376–7,386, 390–92, 396
Three Precious Jewels (triratna), 296, 391
Tibetan calendar, 20
Tibetan medicine, 11, 17, 20
tomb sign(s), four (dur-mig bzhi), 112, 115–17, 123, 201, 252; adversarial – (dur-
gshed), 160–63, 360; strong adversarial – (gshed-dur che), 117; strong ~ (rang-
dur che), 117; weak adversarial ~ (gshed-dur chung), 117; weak ~ (rang-dur
chung), 117, 160–63, 218; outer adversarial ~ (phyi'i gshed), 117; calendar days
associated with ~, 117; thirty-six days of ~ (dur-gyi nyi-ma so-drug), 117, 346;
celestial, atmospheric and terrestrial –, 117; terrestrial ~, 199;~ in natal
horoscope, 160–63; ~ in marriage, 200, 213, 217; ~ in obstacle years, 226,
248–9, 251, 254; ~ in death, 308, 315–16; ~ in computational charts, 384
tormented spirit (yi-dvags), 46, 241, 326, 330–31, 333
treasure-doctrine (gter-ma/gter-chos). See gter-ma.
trigram(s), eight (spar-kha brgyad), 12, 16, 19–20, 49, 64, 106–9, 115–16; origins of
~, 46, 53; even, odd and irregular ~, 141–2; metaphors for ~, 107–8; heavenly
medicine (gnam-sman), 107–8, 200, 205–7, 222, 239–40; average luck (phyva-
gYang), 107–8, 205–7; corporal punishment (lus chad-pa), 107–8, 200, 205–7,
222, 241; cutting influence of demons (bdud-gcod), 107–8, 200, 201, 205–7,
222, 239–40, 353; five demons ('dre-lnga), 107–8, 200, 205–7, 222, 239–40;
growth through glory (dpal-bskyed), 107–8, 200, 205–7, 222, 239–40; harm
(gnod-pa), 107–8, 200, 205–7, 222; intimation of luck (phyva-lon), 107–8, 200,
205–7, 222, 239–40; sustaining vitality (srog-'tsho), 107–8, 200, 205–7, 222;
calendar days and hours calculated in ~, 108; earthly, heavenly and
adversarial gates of,83; multiples of nine based on ~ (spar-kha'i dgu-mig),
253; ~in natal horoscope, 150, 157, 194; ~ in marriage, 194, 205–7, 213, 223;
~ in obstacle years, 226, 229–41, 251, 255; ~ in ill-health, 303, 305; ~ in
death, 312, 314-17, 319–23, 326, 329, 341, 345, 349, 353-4, 356,~ in
computational charts, 384; current – (babs-spar), 107, 142–3, 229–31, 163–4,
235, 237, 248–9, 308, 321, 345; natal ~ (skyes-spar), 70, 107–8; natal ~ in natal
horoscope, 143, 157-60, 164–70, 176–8, 186; natal – in marriage, 196–7,
200–205, 210–11, 216–17; natal – in obstacle years, 229–31, 237
yams-nad diseases, 241–2
year(s) (lo), 57–69; four elemental aspects of ~,59–63; twenty-four meteorological
phases of ~ (dus-tshigs nyer-bzhi), 88; standard (dkyus-ma) and inverse (ldog) ~
calculations, 86; ~ calculated according to sectors of growth and decline, 90;
~ coinciding with the four tomb signs, 95;~ aspects related to constitutional
types, 64-5, 171; ~ in geomancy, 120–26; ~in natal horoscope, 154, 156, 158,
165; ~in marriage, 194, 196; ~ in obstacle years, 226; ~ in ill-health, 300; ~ in
death, 315–16; present~ (gnam-lo), 226, 229, 234–6, 239–40, 247.251, 255,
257–9, 285, 296, 308, 314, 329, 349; natal ~ (skyes-lo), 140–41, 145–56, 158,
162, 166–9, 171–2, 186–9, 194, 196, 210–11, 218. See also inauspicious years,
log-men, year-cycle, year-signs
year-cycle(s) (lo-skor), 223; sexagenary ~ (lo drug-bcu/ rab-byung), 12, 15, 19, 24–29
(plates), 65–85, 109, 140; ~in natal horoscope, 147-55, 170–71;~ in obstacle
years, 226; the twelve ~ (lo-skor bcu-gnyis), 16,65–6, 109; ~in natal
horoscope, 145–147; calendrical cycle of 180 years based on the three rows of
numeric squares, 36–43 (plates), 96-101
year-signs (lo-rtags), 12, 164–5; twelve animal –, 48, 49, 53, 66, 305; ~ in
geomancy, 120–38; ~in marriage, 194—7, 202–4, 211, 220–21;~ in obstacle
years, 229, 234–5, 236, 239; adversarial ~ (gshed-lo), 214; ~in the hour of
divination, 265, 267, 269; ~ in ill-health, 305; ~ in death, 308–12, 315–17,
319, 321–2, 326, 329–30, 345–50, 354; ~ in computational charts, 360–61
ye-'brog (demons), 21, 63; ~ in natal horoscope, 150, 166, 167, 179; ~ in marriage,
218; ~ in obstacle years, 234, 241, 246, 250–52, 254, 257; ~ in the hour of
divination, 263, 267, 269, 274, 276; ~ in ill-health, 296, 300; ~ in death, 336



432
First published in 2001 by
John Eskenazi Ltd
15 Old Bond Street
London wlx 4JL
All rights reserved. No part of this
publication may be reproduced, stored
in a retrieval system or transmitted, in
any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, without the prior permission
in writing of the Publisher.
in association with
Sam Fogg Ltd
15d Clifford Street
London wls 4HZ
British Library Cataloguing-in-
Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is
available from the British Library
Copyright © 2001 John Eskenazi Ltd,
Sam Fogg Ltd
Author biography
Gyurme Dorje holds a PhD in Tibetan
Literature (soas, London, 1987) and a
Masters degree in Sanskrit with Oriental
Studies (Edinburgh, 1971). For over thirty
years he has been continuously engaged in
both classical and modern Tibetan studies,
translating primary sources and conducting
fieldwork throughout the Tibetan plateau.
From 1991 to 1996 he held research
fellowships at London University, working
on the translation and compilation of the
Encyclopaedic Tibetan-English Dictionary
(forthcoming). The published works of
which he is author, translator, co-editor or
contributor include The Nyingma School of
Tibetan Buddhism: Its Fundamentals and History
(Wisdom, 1991), Tibetan Medical Paintings
(Serindia, 1992), The Tibet Handbook with
Bhutan (Footprint, 1996 and 1999) and
A Handbook of Tibetan Culture (Rider, 1993).
Forthcoming publications include The
Complete Tibetan Book of the Dead and The
Guhyagarbha Tantra.
ISBN 0-9539941-0-4
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-
Publication Data available
Editor Christine Davis
Designer Mark Vernon-Jones
Project Manager Robert Marcuson
Frontispiece illustration
Detail of Plate 16, fig. 8 (see p. 189)
Colour origination by The Repro House,
London, in association with Robert
Marcuson
Contents page illustrations
Left, Detail of Plate 16, fig. 8 (see p. 188)
Right, Detail of Plate 16, fig. 10 (see p. 190)
Printed in Belgium by Snoeck Ducaju
& Zoon
Illustration pp. 6–7
Detail from Plate 2, fig. 5 (see p. 111)
Illustration pp. 400—401
Detail from Plate 1, fig. 2 (see p. 50)
